Part 2: Human Revolution

Chapter 16: Buddhism Is about Winning [16.10]

16.10 Leading a Winning Life Based on the Mystic Law

President Ikeda explains that those who base themselves on the Mystic Law can create positive value from their successes as well as their setbacks and failures, all of which will help them surmount the next challenge that awaits and savor ultimate victory in life.

The fundamental aim of Nichiren Buddhism is the development of kosen-rufu. Time and time again in his writings, Nichiren Daishonin stresses the importance of kosen-rufu, or “widespread propagation” of the Mystic Law. As such, the true measure of the success of our movement is the degree to which we have actually been able to expand the realm of kosen-rufu. Our ultimate goal is to build a peaceful and happy society based on Buddhist humanism and the philosophy of respect for the dignity of life. In that regard, even just continuing to advance a step or two at a time is fine.

Of course, life is a succession of struggles, and we experience victories and defeats on various levels along the way. No matter how strong or capable we are, we can’t always win. That’s the way it is in life’s struggles.

My mentor, Josei Toda, composed the following poem as one of his final messages to us:

“Winning and losing

are both

part of life,

but I pray to the Buddha

for final victory.”

Life is long, and there may be times when things don’t work out as we hope. But we embrace the Mystic Law, the incomparable strategy of the Lotus Sutra (cf. WND-1, 1001). If we uphold the Lotus Sutra and base ourselves on faith throughout our lives, then no matter what successes or setbacks we may experience along the way, we are certain to win in the end. That is the great teaching of Buddhism. Therefore, we have nothing to worry about.

Win or lose, the most important thing is whether we can make that particular result a cause for future victory. Every moment is a fresh start.

Let’s continue advancing together with optimism and confidence toward our next triumph, united solidly in purpose with our fellow members. This epitomizes the practice of the Buddhism of true cause—a teaching of moving ever forward from the present moment.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, September 14, 2005.

The Wisdom for Creating Happiness and Peace

brings together selections from President Ikeda’s works on key themes

.

Part 2: Human Revolution

Chapter 16: Buddhism Is about Winning [16.9]

Part 2: Human Revolution

Chapter 16: Buddhism Is about Winning [16.11]