f#,.. .---á-..4 ¥ -... ..:-;.:¥ ¥ .' ¥' ¥:¥¥ .. ,= ,I . . '. . .. .,;.I'.. f .. .!., " ¥ á:.. -:.. . .":: . . . !. : ¥. ! á-á .....-. Daisaku Ikeda Published by World Tribune Press 606 Wilshire Blvd. Santa Monica, CA 90401 C2011 by the Soka Gakkai ¥ All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Design by Lightbourne. Inc. ISBN 978-1-935523-21-5 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 Contents iv Editor's Note 1 "Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime-The Fundamental Purpose of Life and a Source of Hope for Humankind" (1} 11 "The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo-Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory ThroughCorrect Buddhist Practice" (2) 20 '"If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, You Are Not Embracing the Mystic Law'" (3) 28 "Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude-Refusing To Live an 'Endless, Painful Austerity'" (4) 37 "Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a 'Brave and Vigorous' Spirit-Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge" (S} 46 "The Mystic Nature of Our Lives-'Become the Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You"' (6) 54 "Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the Oneness of Mentor and Disciple" (7) 64 Index Editor's Note This series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda was published in SGI-USA's Living Buddhism from the September-October 2006 issue through the March-April 2007 issue. Please also see The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, pp. 3-5, for "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime." ¥ GZ, page number(s)-refers to the Gosha zenshu, the Japanese.language compilation of letters, treatises, essays and oral teachings of Nichiren Daishonin. ¥ LSOC, page number(s)-refers to The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, translated by Burton Watson (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2009). 11 OTT, page number(s)-refers to The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, translated by Burton Watson (Soka Gakkai: Tokyo, 2004). ¥ WND, page number(s)-refers to The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1 (WND-1) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 1999) and vol. 2 (WND-2) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2006). J.t¥. Jkt11" vá-..¥..á,i,t,)t,:............;-.;.:..:--.:...¥¥á;.;-.ltf M ku u án ,áh00(.iJU 00 :;.:--------.¥ . ¥ á--¥.y""'., ...r-y,.o .. ¥,., ,'p f ¥o¥.. ¥._, -,) ,1 1 -: á::@ta1c2 ? LW"I -!.t,1 I Já\,r).\.,,-á,:.r .,.. -,á.et,áme á -..-.,;.:,. / , ¥¥, á= r .,.h "" :\ .;.¥'¥ ¥ : ::}á;,á¥¥, .'.-/ '$,.' . -á¥¥-:"':-_:_...' SGI President lkeda¥s Lecture Series This is a series of le.res '7y SGI President Ikeda on the writiug "On Attaining Buddhal1ood in This Lifetime." He writes, "Nichiren Dais/wni11:.profound teaching ¥ ¥¥ ofattait1i.g B11ddhahood irl this lifetime cn11 powerfully transform the age and open a brightfiiturefor our modern world in the twenty-first c.lltury." < ¥ on Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.The Fundamental Purpose of Life and a Source of Hope for Humankind Ifyaa wim tD me JUIH idf from the sufferings of birth and death you have e@HMecl simztime wilhout beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed rmgl,trn¥nml in tbidifdiott. you must perceive the mystic truth that is orig.imllfinhesn11 iaalltiringbrinp. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting . will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all JiR. r0a AtlaiaiaglacMbeboocl in This Lifetime,¥ The Writings of Nichiren Daislio11in, vol. I, p. 3) ust whatcoostibrtes a cleeplyrntaningful life? JWhat is true bappinew. Nx:hirm lluddbivn is a ttaching of hope that enabla 11&to forge a state of UDS1l1'pused and indestructible happi.ness and to lead a life of supreme value. while also helping others do the wne. All people have the potential to attain Buddhahood; moreover, they can gain that lofty state just as they are and in fact are asiured of being able to do so in this lifetime. Nichiren Buddhism dearly elucidates this wonderful path to cnlightcnmenL Nichiren Daishonin's profound teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime was a revolutionary concept that turned prevailing Buddhist thought on its head. Indeed, it con.tinues to shine today as a principle that can powerfully transform the age and open a bright future for our modern world in the twenty-first century. Therefore, I look forward to studying Nichiren's writing "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime" together with you, as we embark in high spirits on a new journey of growth and development toward the Soka Gakkai's eightieth anniversary (in 2010). 2 The Profound Meaning of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime" is an important writing that clarifies the basic theory and practice of Nichiren Buddhism. SGI members throughout the globe have deepened their understanding of the essence of Nichiren Daishonin's teachings by earnestly studying this writing as a guideline for practice and study. Although the original is no longer extant and the precise date and name of the recipient are unknown, this letter is traditionally thought to have been written around 1255 and addressed to Toki Jonin.1 The assertion that it was composed in 1255, shortly after Nichiren publicly declared his teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in 1253, is credible in view of the letter's content, explaining as it does the significance of chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo in terms of both theory and practice. The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo is the foundation of Nichiren's lifetime of teachings. Nichiren Buddhism, unlike the estab.lished Buddhist schools of his day, was not dedicated to the worship of a specific god or Bud.dha. Nichiren established the means for all people to achieve enlightenment, the ideal of the Lotus Sutra, by formulating the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which enables us to acti.vate our inherent Buddha nature and manifest it as the life-state of Buddhahood. In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo has two aspects: the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and chanting in terms of practice. Chanting in terms of faith refers to the spiritual aspect of our prac.tice. This essentially consists of the struggle we wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or darkness-a battle against the negative and destructive forces within us. lt means that through the power of faith-in other words, through strengthening our conviction that we possess the Buddha nature-we can break through the darkness obscuring this awareness, thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood. Chanting in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers to chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo ourselves and also teaching it to others. It means making efforts in word and deed for our own and others' happiness in the course of our spiritual struggle against inner negativity and illusion. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we are both chanting the name of, and calling forth, the Buddha nature in our own lives and the lives of others. Through applying our practice of faith to win over doubt and delusion, the power of our inherent Buddha nature is called forth by the sound of our chanting and spontaneously mani.fests in our lives. 2 The key point that sets Nichiren Buddhism apart from the other Buddhist schools of bis day was the establishment of this concrete means for attaining Buddhahood. And from the time he first declared Nam-myoho-renge-kyo until the moment of his death, Nichiren ardently strove to teach this supreme path of enlightenment to peo.ple throughout the land. In the opening passage of"On Attaining Bud.dhahood in This Lifetime," Nichiren clearly and fully articulates the basic philosophy of enlight.enment that lies at the heart of his teaching, which e:ci.sts for the happiness of all hwnanity: "If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is originally ------r inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho.renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life" (WND-1, 3). v.re'll discuss the profound meaning of this passage in detail ne>..1 time. But briefly, it says that by manifesting within us the mystic truth inher.ent in all living beings, we can free ourselves from the endless sufferings of birth and death. The name of that mystic truth is Myoho-renge-kyo, and the way to manifest it is through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The Significance of Our Existence as Human Beings Nevertheless, even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching. 1117,:0-1, 3 The concept of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime refers to ordinary people becoming enlightened during the course of their present existences. By extension, it means that they can achieve this just as they are. As such, attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime means the same thing as attain3ng Buddhahood in one's present form, which is the Lotus Sutra's approach to Buddhahood and illustrated by the example of the dragon king's daughter' in the sutra's "Devadatta" chapter. This view contrasts sharply with the preá Lotus Sutra teachings, which expound that one can become enlightened only after practicing austerities over countless lifetimes. Because the 4 ...__ life-state of Buddhahood is at one with the eter.nal Mystic Law and abounds with infinite wisdom and compassion, it tended to be seen as some.thing completely separate and removed from the lives of ordinary people steeped in illusion. Attaining enlightenment was thought to require overcoming the unfathomably deep chasm between the spiritual states of a Buddha and ordi.nary people, and this gave rise to the idea that it was necessary to carry out austere practices for innumerable kalpas.. Nichiren Buddhism clarifies that it is specifi.cally in this present existence, in which we have been born as human beings, that we can actualize the principle of attaining Iluddhahood in one's present form as explained in the Lotus Sutra. And Nichiren Daishonin reveals how to actualize this profound teaching. Drawing an analogy to rice crops, Nichiren notes that while some ripen early and some ripen late, they will all mature and be ready for harvest within the year. He explains that votaries of the Lotus Sutra will likewise attain Buddhahood in this existence without fail.5 Nichiren places importance on the present lifetime of human beings. Of course, not only humans but also aU living beings possess the Buddha nature and have the potential to attain Buddhahood in their present form, but Nichiren's focus is always first and foremost on the happi.ness of human beings. The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted and rich; it has the capacity for magnificent achievement. For that very reason, the heart often undergoes great suffering and torment, and can become trapped in an endless, downward spiral. SGI President Ikeda at Soka University, Hachioji, Tokyo, on May 5, 2006. Will we transmigrate forever along the paths of evil, or can we succeed in directing our lives into an orbit of good? As evidenced in many of his writings, Nichiren repeatedly stresses the crucial impor.tance of the heart, or mind. lo this inner realm of life, the potential resides for dramatic shifts from evil to good or from good to evil. That is why Nichiren's teaching of enlightenment can be viewed as a process that begins with inner change. In other words, through the power of faith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us that are governed by the fundamental darkness in all human hearts and manifest the positive functions of life that are one with the Dharma nature-our Buddhahood. This present lifetime, in which we have been born as human beings, represents a golden opportunity to ensure that our lives no longer transmigrate along the evil paths but instead traverse the paths of good. On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime Emphasis on Inner Change Therefore,when you chant myoho and recite mrge, you must summon up deep faith thatMyobo-renge--lJ'o is your life itself. (WND-1. 3) Arouse c1eq, failh, and diligmdy polish your mirror day and night. How sboo1d JOU polish it! Onlyby manting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (WND-1, 4) D "'On Altaining Bnddbabood ll1 This life.Itime,¥Nidm:n O,isbc,njn rborougbly apJain5 tbatwe cmnotaduelP mJighte,mw:ntwi!hout a profound dlaJJF in our livrs, in our hearts and minds. Fm1. be writes that the ID)'Stictmdi with which all living beinp ait cndawrd mrals "'the principlt ofthe JDUbJally .indusivr relariooship of a single moment of life and all pbmornma¥ (WNO. I, 3). What this means is that our lMs or our minds at t.aeh moment both embody all phenomena and pervadeall phenomena This CX>Uld be de&aibed as alifMtttt of oneness with the univme. Also,Nicbirm warns that ifwe seek the Mystic Law outside oundves, then no matter how much we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. we cannot manifest the condition of enlightenment; on the contrary, our Buddhist practice will only "become an endless, painful austerity" (WND-1, 4). Ht dearly states: "Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think theLawis out.side yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic I.aw but an inferior teaching" (WND-1, 3). Nichiren explains that the key to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is summoning up deep f.aith, or confidence, in the existence of our innate Buddhahood. He declares that when we do so, we can polish our lives and reveal our enlightenment, writing: "Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge [that is, chant Nam-myoho-renge.kyo], you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself [literally, }'Our mind at each moment]" (WND-1, 3). He continues: "Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish )'Our mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo¥ (WND-1, 4). In addition, Nichiren speaks of "the mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality" (WND-1, 4)-in other words, the mystic, insautable nature of life, of our hearts and minds, that manifests as Buddhahood. Here, he indicates that Myoho-renge-kyo is the wonderful law of life, of the inner realm of our beings. On that basis, he asserts that when we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in the 6 Mystic Law, we can reveal our Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nichiren writes: "The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras,the direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life [literally, our mind or inner reality], which manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity ofthe Mystic Law. If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle,you are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime" (WND-1, 4). A Teaching of Genuine Humanism Next, I'll touch on the significance of Nichiren Daishonin's teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime from three perspectives. I'll start by pointing out that through opening the way for all people to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime through chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo, Nichiren established for the first time a teaching of genuine humanism. Opening the way to enlightenment for all people could be called the prerequisite for a genuinely humanistic religion. This, I believe, is the religious or philo.sophical significance of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nichiren had deep insight into the potential of human beings, discerning that they could free themselves from a cycle of negative transmigra.tion and realize a positive one through profound inner change. And he set forth a practical way to enable all people to achieve this. Consequently, there is no other teaching that can more deservedly be called humanistic than Nichiren Buddhism. In "The True Aspect of All Phenomena," Nichiren writes: "Though it is thought that Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the three virtues of sovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake of all of us living beings, that is not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who endow him with the three virtues" (WND-1, 384). This pas.sage describes a shift from an authoritarian to a humanistic, people-centered religion.' The teaching of Nichiren, who established the con.crete means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime, makes this shift possible. When the Soka Gakkai's first president, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, formulated his theory of value, he did not include the aspects of"holiness" or "sacredness," which many thinkers before him had considered to constitute religious value. For Mr. Makiguchi, ""great good" was deemed the high.estvalue a religion should strive to realize. By"great good," he is referring to the highest value that can be actualized by human beings and society. In Mr. Makiguchi's theory of value, we find the view that a true religion is one that serves the welfare of bu.man beings. Nichiren's opening of the path to attaining Buddhabood in this lifetime signifies the establishment of a religion that contributes to the happiness of human beings in the greatest possible way. The Significance of Attaining Buddhahood for Our Lives Second, byopening the path to anaining Buddha.hood in this lifetime, ichiren Daishonin made it possible for us to lead lives based on the infinite power of the Mystic Law-that is, to lead solid and secure lives that give us the courage and con.fidence to be self-reliant. This is the significance of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifrtime in terms of our individual lives. In Nichiren Buddhism, attaining enlightenment is not about embarking on some inconceivably long On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime journey to bct-ome a resplendent, godlike Bnddha, it is about a1..--complish ins a transforrnation in the depths of one's being. This rc\'oluril)nary view of enlightenment fundamentally .hanged the meaning of Buddhist practk't from bow it was traditionally ,iewed. 1n other words_ it is not a matter of practidng in order to scale the highest summit of enlightenment at some point in the distant future. Rather, it is a mtlSWlt. moment-to-moment, inner struggle .'ffll muling our innate Dharma nature or allO\\ingourselvestobe ruled by our fundamental darl..-ncss anddelusion. This an<asing effort to pol.ish ourli"'5is the essc:nc:e ofBuddhist practice. Only by winning over our inner darkness and 1\cgativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our full potential. The same is true if we wish to savor true fulfillment. Allow me to emphasize, thcn, that the Nichiren Buddhist practice toward attaining Buddhahood in this Hfettme is the only means to conquer the dark.ness and delusion that are the fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate true inde.pendence. It allows us to construct a solid self, and achieve a state of life of boundless happi.ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental purpose of an individual's life. ing Buddhahood for Humanity > --. . ¥á.--.,.¥á.. ...-á--.". ... _.,.,_ V. The Lotus Sutra is the king of su.tras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it npl¥rns that the entity of our life, which manifests either good or evil at each mor:ornt, is in fact the entityof the Mystic Law. If you chant Myoho-mige-kyo with deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain R11dctbabood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states, ¥After I hav. passed into extinction,[one] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such aperson assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way." Never doubt in the slightest. (Wl\'D-l, 41 Trurd. tht principleof attaining Buddhahood realm has been neglected and all too many peoplein this lifetime is significant in that it offers areobsessed withseeking comfort, ease andpleasure asource of hope to humanityand opens the in external things-things outside of themselves. way to transformingthe destiny ofall humankind. Without surmounting the fundamental human This is itscollective or universal significance. delusions of greed, anger and foolishness, we can.Many leading thinkm and intellectuals recog. not solve the many problems that the world faces ni7.e that modern civilimion has lost sight of the today, including the preoccupation with economic human being and become deadlocked on many growth, politics that are devoid of humanism, fronts. There is no denying that the inner spiritual international conflicts, warfare, growing disparity 8 between rich and poor, and rampant discrimina.tion. One conclusion from my dialogues with leading thinkers is that the only real solution is for human beings themselves to change, that the sole key lies in human revolution. It could further be said that without establish.ing a correct view of life and death, it is impossible to conquer inner darkness and delu.sion at the most fundamental level. Without the Middle Way view of life and death-a view that rejects the extremes of the doctrine of annihila.tion and the doctrine of eternity7-true and lasting happiness cannot be achieved. The only way for human beings to change is for them to conquer their inner darkness and rediscover the eternal dignity within their own lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people are originally endowed will directly lead to a change in the destiny of humankind. With that conviction, we of the SGI have been working to build a network of good all around the globe. In the course of these lectures, I will comment further on the growing expectations and praise for this w1precedented endeavor we are undertaking. At the end of "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Never doubt in the slightest" (WND-1, 4). He is telling I. Toki Jonin: A lay follower of Nichiren Daishonin. He lived in Wakamiya, Kiusushika District of Shimosa Province (part of present-day Chib.l Prefoc¥ lure) and served as a retainer to Lord Chiba. tic Wil.i the re.-ipient of Ill.lily of Nichiren's writings, incluJing "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," and cart'fully pre,erv..J them. 2. In "I low Those lniti.tlly A>piring to the Way Can Att:lin BuJJ.h.lhood through the lotus Sutr,1," Nichiren writes: "',\'hen we revere Myoho-reng,... kyo inherent in our own life as the obje.-1 of devotion, the BuJJha nature -.i1hin us is summoned forth and m.uiifested by our chanting of ¥=á myohu-renge-kyo. This is what is meant by 'Buddha.' To illustr.1te, when a c.iged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky arc thereby summoned and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gatha .iround, the bird in the cage strhács to get ouL When with our mouths we ch.lot the My¥tic Law, our BudJ!u nature, being summoned, will im-ariably e1ncf)le" (WND-1, 887), 3. In "L>.:vadatr¥,¥ thee twdfth chapta of the lotw Suua, the eight-)C.1t¥old daughter of the dragon king SJg¥ra con,d,es the desire for e11lightenme111 ,,hen ¥he hl'.lrs Bodhisattva Zllanju..hri preach the LotuS S11tra. Sh< comes to offm .1 jc1,¥d to ShJkyamunl and in,t.lllt.1I1<0u.sly pcrfocts the bwhi.sattvu J>r.ictic.. he then .ipp<ars in a lanJ to the south call.,J Spotlos World an,I 111Jnif.e,ts the stat¥ of lluJdhahood without ch.11111ing her us that we should have complete confidence in the reveaJing of our Buddhahood in this lifetime. His words also contain the warning that unless we maintain this strong confidence, or faith, we can easiJy lose sight of the fundamental goal of attain.ing Buddhahood in this lifetime and fall into the depths of darkness and delusion. All people at the core of their lives yearn to attain enlightenment. But there is no teaching more difficult to believe or understand than the teaching that we can definitely manifest the state of Buddhahood in our present existence. We of the SCI have taken on the challenge of practicing this profound teaching and sharing it widely with others around the globe. In today's world, we. the courageous Bodhi.sattvas of the Earth, are showing great actual proof of humankind's potential to transform its destiny. Proud of our noble mission, let us continue to joyously spread Nichiren Buddhism.with its teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime that enables all people to achieve unsur.passed happiness-and lead the most valuable and fulfilling lives possible. dragon form ;u,d preaches the, Lotus Sutra to all livuig bcms, tb,rc (stt Tho, Lotus Surra .md ra Opc,uni cutd Ctow,g SMlnll. pp. .6-23). -l In ancient lnJi.ln COs1Dology, an=. long period of time. 5. In his writtng "'Th< Do<:trine of Ton,e Ttwu=J Realms in a Single Moment of life,¥ Nichiren sures; ¥Ife,. of the Lo!U.1 Sum carry out rtligious pra.:tice a:. the sum . then cw:ry one of them without C.lCq>lion will ,.ly .main 811ddhaho.>J 'Withln hi$ or her prcsocnt lifetimc. To cite <lll an.uog_v. if one pbnu the fidds in spring and summa, then, wh,eth<r it be ouly or late, ooe LS cctUin to n,ap a b.&tvdt within the year. Votaries of the Lorus Sutrol f:lll 1nro thttt cat,gorics. sup,:rior, middling. infor10r, J,l"'nJing upon th<ir ar.:ibo. and yet all will invariably attain enlightenment within a single litetimc" (W.D-2. 88). 6. For SGI Prt:SiJcnt lk.'s Jet:ailcJ di:icuÈion of this pusage, stt the .-.:moo 20().I Livu,g BuJJlus"" p. :?5. 7. Th.e do.:trinc of mnihilition is the mislllU11 anadunfflt to the notion that hfc b<giru with birth and enJs with <lath. According 10 this view, there is only th, pm.:nt life, .u,d d-,,.ith rcpr.:s.:nu a compktc ccss.ition of existence both ph)-si,.al lUJJ ¥piritual The doctrine of eternity is also the mutakm notion th.it "h¥t exists here in the pn:>cnt is permanent and unchanging. Tbts .iew rcjc..-ts ausality, .so that neither practicing good nor practicing evil proJuca; any chJ11gc in one's conJition. 1-1 On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime A Humanistic. Key Points People-centered Religion Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Terms of Faith and Practice ln Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam-myoho.renge-l")'O has two .--ts: the chanting of Nam.myoho-renge-l.1,0 in terms offaithand chanting in terms ofpractice. Chanting in terms of faith rckrs to the spiritual aspc,a ofour practke. This essen.tially consis1s ofthe struggle we wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or darkness--a battle against the ncgaliwe and destructive forces within us. It llltmS that through the power of faith-in other words, 1hrougb Sba1gtbening our oonviaion that we possess the Buddha wtu:c we can break through the .darbess obscuring this awareness, thus malingthe"life-SlmofBuddhahood. Onnt.ing in 1erm$ of . meanwhile, refers to dwniDg Nam-myoho-imge-kyo ourselves and ¥tracbingittoothm."h!Dela rnaking--.ffortsin word and deed tor om own and others" happiness in the a>mse ofom spiritual sttagg1e against inner Dtptivity .nil i1lnsioo, (p. 3) The Heart Is Most Important Thehuman heart is. rnubifaceted'll1d rich; it bas the capacity for magnifia:nt . For that vr:ry mlSOD, 1he heart oftm undergoes great suffrriog and torment. and CID become trapped in an cndJcss.downward spiral. W"JII we transmigrate foreveralong the paths ofml.or canwe succeed in directing our li"'5 into an orbit of good? As evi.dmctd inmany ofhis writinp, Nichiren repeatedly stresses the aucia1 importance of the heart, or mind.ID thisinner realm oflife. the potential resides for dramatic shifts from evil to good or from good to evil That is why Nicbiren', teachingQf enlightm¥ ment can be viewed as a process that begins with innerchange. In other words, through the power of f.a.ith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us that aregoverned by the fundamentaldarknessin all human hearts and manifest the positive functions of life that are one with the Dharma nature-our Buddhahood. (p. 5) Nichiren had deep insight into the potential of human beings. discerning that they could free them.selves from a cycle of negative transmigration and realize a positive one through profound inner change. And he set forth a practical way to enable aU people to achieve this. Consequently, there is no other teaching that can more deservedly be called humanistic than Nichiren Buddhism. In "The True Aspect of All Phenomena," Nichiren writes: ¥Though it is thought that Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the three virtues ofsovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake ofall of us living beings, that is not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who endow him with the three virtues" (WND-1, 384).This passage describes a shift from an authoritarian to a humanistic, people-centered religion. The teaching of Nichiren, who established the concrete means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime, makes this shift possible. (p. 7) The Fundamental Purpose of Our Lives Only by winning overour inner darkness and neg.ativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our full potential. The same is true if we wish to savor true fulfillmenLAllow me to emphasize, then, that the Nichiren Buddhist practice toward attainingBuddbabood in this lifetime is the only means to a,nquer the darkness and delusion that are the fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate true independence. It allows us to construct a solid . and achieve a state of life of boundless happi.ness and peace ofmind. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental pur.pose of an individual's life. (p. 8) Changing the Destiny of All Humanity The -0nly way for human beings to change is for them to conquer their inner darkness and redis.cover the eternal dignity within their own lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people are originally endowed will directly lead to a change in the destiny of humankind. With that conviction, weofthe SGI have been working to build a network of good all around the globe. (p. 9) 10 The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through Correct Buddhist Practice The practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo contains immeasurable benefit, for it enables us to summon forth in our own lives the limitless power of the Mystic Law, the fundamental law of the universe. Nichiren Daishonin actualized happiness for all humankind through the boundless beneficial power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The doctrinal basis for this endeavor is set forth with great sitn.plicity and conciseness in the opening passage of "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Llfetitne": "If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since tune without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetitne, you must perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life" (The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3). This passage encapsulates the profound prin.ciples of Buddhism and the religious revolution to bring about the enlightenment of all people that was begun by Shakya.ml.!Jll Buddha and com.pleted by Nichiren. Each word and phrase is infused with the sublime wisdom of Buddhism. "To free oneself from the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning" relates to the fundamental questions of human existence and the original purpose of religion. "To attain unsurpassed enlightenment" constitutes the profound Buddhist response to these ques.tions. "To perceive the mystic truth inherent in all living beings" is this response further refined and deepened based on the philosophy of the Lotus Sutra. And "chanting Myoho-renge-kyo" refers to the practice established by Nichiren to enable all 1 1 On Attaining Buddhahood in This lifetime -people to translate this Buddhist wisdom into action. The rcaliution of this pl'l\."titt is the fruit of great compassion that aspim for the happiness of all people. and indicates the truly l'l'YOlutionary natureof Nichiffll Buddhism. Through this PIISSIF as a whole, it becomes dear 1hat 1be prac:ticz Ç dmding Nun-myoho.rmge-k,o ea,&hc,dby Nidma is the (l)mcl adsapamt Bodclri,tpaaicz wthe short ClfClq PIIIIF sucrina:lJaniadates lhe pro.foaad iasip1I claBMM,;..m disdled over more than two millennia, and the compassion and wisdom for leading all people to enlightenment found in Nichircn Buddhism. The purpose of this installment is to confirm that Nichiren's practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo represents the ultimate form of correct Buddhist practice, and that its establishment marks the start of a genuinely people-centered Buddhism that makes it possible for all humankind to achieve the same enlightened state as the Buddha. Happiness If yoa wilh to fne ,aune)f &om the sufferings of birth and death you have mdmed llincc time without beginningand to attain without fail unsurpassed mlightmmrm in this lifmme. you must percdve the mystic truth that is orig.inally iabermt ia aO Jiving beings. 11iia truth is Myohc,.renge-kyo. Chanting Myobo-n:opkyoawill tbaaoreeaable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life. l"Oo Alwaaat Boddbabood in Tbii IJlcrimr: Tht Writings of Nid1iren Daisho11i11, vol. I, Pá 3) Let w start by considering tht profound Nicbiren Daishonin's reference to "the suffer.meaning of the opening phrase, ¥If you ings of birth and death endured since time wish to free yourself from the sufferinp of withoutbeginning" is premised on the concept of birth and death you have endured since time transmigration, according to which living beings without beginning ... " undergo an unceasing, suffering-filled cycle of 1 2 birth and death that continues from the infinite past into the infinite future. Buddhism holds that this never-ending round of suffering ultimately arises from earthly desires, and that a negative cycle of earthly desires, karma and suffering is part and parcel of transmigration. In this sense, "the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning" also represents an inter.minable succession of illusion and suffering. Because the thought of such endless transmi.gration is ultimately unbearable, people naturally came to wish for a way to put an end to this painful cycle and free themselves from the chains of delusion and suffering. In Buddhism, there are two basic approaches to liberation from the suffering of this cycle. One view holds that people can free themselves from the endless karmic cycle of birth and death by eradicating earthly desires believed to cause it. The other is the Mahayana approach, in which the essence oflife that undergoes transmigration is not viewed as a transient, impermanent phenomenon. The Mahayana teachings, for example, espouse the concept of undergoing the cycle of birth and death in accordance with the bodhisattva vow to guide living beings to enlightenment; or they view the oscillation between birth and death as a cycle of emerging from and returning to the funda.mental, all-embracing life of the universe. The latter view can be easily understood using the metaphor of waves on the ocean: birth is like a wave appearing on the surface of the ocean-the life of the universe--while death is the wave sub.merging back into that ocean. Gaining such an understanding of the essence of our own lives, which repeat the cycle of birth and death, is to attain "unsurpassed enlightenment," the highest awakening of the Buddha. The Mystic Truth Embraces and Is Inherent in All Things In this passage, to "perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings" means to "attain unsurpassed enlightenment." The wisdom to apprehend this universally inherent truth repre.sents the supreme enlightenment of the Buddha. The point where Buddhism radically departs from many other philosophies and religions is that it uncovered within the individual's own life the Law, or limitless inner power. for resolving all suffering on the most essential level A Buddha is one who, based on this Law, has attained the ulti.mate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and construct indestructible happiness. Buddhism is a teaching of unparaUeled humanism that stresses the boundless potential within human beings. That's why it is called the "internal way." To "perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings:Q is to "attain unsur.passed enlightenment"; it is the sole means for freeing oneself from ..the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning." This is Shakyamunts starting point, and the entirety of Budd.hist thoughL The scripture that proclaims this philosophy of the "internal way" is the lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people can attain enlightenment. The Lotus Sutra could be said to embody the ultimate principle of respect for human dignity. In this writing, Nichiren Daishonin says that the "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beingsu is the "principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena."This latter principle refers to the inscrutable relationship that exists between 1 3 . -.ourselves--<>urmindsorea.h life-.mon\cnt---a1\J the unn-eISe; its meaning is that all phenomena are contained in one's life and that one's life pervadt"s all phenomena. This principle no doubt corresponds in meaning to the "principle of inhcrence and pervasion"1 articulated by Nichikan. an early eighteenth-century restorer of N'"tduren Buddhism. in describing the doc.trine of "'three thousand realms in a single moment of life.¥ The cosmic life enfolds and pervades every.thing. andbecause it does so. it is also inherent in all things. The oneness ofthe cosmic life and our individual li\a lies at 1hc heart ofthe -principle of. nunuaDy indusR RIPTicmship of a single momeat oflifeand¥phmomena ¥yo awaken to dlisDIJSlicuada is1Dauain lbl" Buddha .., ¥unsur.paacl en1igkeiii--utá NamillJI ,-Mystic Tntth Tbe quation is how to enable aD people to per.ceive this ¥mymc truth that is originally inberrm."in all liring brings¥ A widely aa:essible Buddbisn 1Mil1 tlOt be possible if only a vuy limited nornberof people can follow the way set forth for appnhmdingthe m,mctruth. Before N"ICbiren Daishonin. the Grat Teacher T.ien.t¥ai of Ouna tried to establ.iab the means for perc.eiving this mystic truth through the prac.tice of observing the mind, also known as the practice ofconcentration and wight. But it wu not a means readily ac.c.essible to the people of the Latter Day of the Law. The initial step N"schiren took in opening the great path to universal enlightenment was to name the mystic truth. The universally inherent mystic truth originally had no name, but as Nichiren explains in "The Entity of the Mystic Law," a sageawakened to this truth in his own life On Attaining Buddhahood in This Llfetin1e could give it the most appropriate name (sec \\TND-1, 421).2 Naming something is a creative process. Giving a name that accurately grasps the essence of a thing has the important effect of making that essence available to all people; it enables all people to share in its value. In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life.time," as indicated by the passage "the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings is Myoho-renge-kyo;' Nichiren states that this mystic truth that constitutes the fundamental Law of the universe is none other than Myoho.renge-kyo. Strictly speaking, the term Myoho.renge-kyo existed prior to this as the title of the Lotus Sutra, but Nichiren was the first to identify Myoho-renge-kyo as being the name of the prin.ciple of the "true aspect of all phenomena,''3 which the Lotus Sutra teaches is the profound wisdom of all Buddhas. Also, although the "Life Span¥ chapter of the Lotus Sutra expounds the life of the eternal Buddha from the standpoint of Sbakyamuni, it was Nichiren who first revealed that the essence of the Buddha's eternal life-the "heart of the 'Life Span¥ chapter,,-is Myoho.renge-kyo (see "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind:' WND-1, 371). The eternal Buddha, since attaining enlighten.ment in the remote past, repeatedly undergoes the qde ofbirth and death as a Buddha while appear.ing in various forms within the Ten Worlds4for the salvation of all living beings. The "Life Span" chap.ter reveals that living beings of the Ten Worlds (including Buddhas), and the phenomena of birth and death as well, are all manifestations ofthe great eternal life of the universe. Because Nichiren says thatthe"heart ofthe 'Life Span'chapter" is Myoho.renge¥kyo, we can infer that Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the great, eternal, universal life that is revealed in the "Life Span" chapter. Living beings in the nine worlds, repeatedly undergoing birth and death, also follow the 14 rhythm of birth and death of emergjng from and Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the "mystic truth submerging back into the great eternal life that that is originally inherent in all living beings." is Myoho-renge-kyo. They are embraced by ft was Nichiren who first declared that Myoho-renge-kyo, and at the same time possess Myoho-renge-kyo is to be chanted and spread in Myoho-renge-kyo within them. This is why the Latter Day of the Law. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo To Perceive the Mystic Truth and Establish the Buddhism of the People The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, true and correct in both word and prin.ciple. Its words are the ultimate reality, and this reality is the Mystic Law (myoho). It is called the Mystic Law because it reveals the principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena. That is why this sutra is the wisdom of all Buddhas. Life at each moment encompasses the body and mind and the self and environment of all sentient beings in the Ten Worlds as well as all insentient beings in the three thousand realms, including plants, sky. earth, and even the minutest particles of dust. Life at each moment permeates the entire realm of phenomena and is revealed in all phenomena. To be awakened to this principle is itself the mutually inclusive relationship of life at each moment and all phenomena. (WND-I. JJ Nichiren Daishonin's next step in opening this great path was to establish the prac.tice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. He appended the word nan.a transliteration of the Sanskrit word 11amas. meaning "devotion".to the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo, and established the practice of invoking this truth. Nam means "to dedicate one's life." Chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo aloud represents a deter.mination and vow to dedicate one's life to the realm of truth of Myoho-renge-kyo in thought, word and deed. 1 5 On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime At the same time, chanting Nam-myoho.renge-l'}'o enables each person to a(."tualizc a way of life based on the universal truth of Myoho.renge-láyo. The crucial point in chanting Nam.myoho-renge-l-yo in Nichiren Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an e>.1ernal truth. It constitutes a practicr to actually summon forth the inner truth that pervades the universe an<i our own sd. and I. our lives in acrord with that truth. This practicr oould be described as a process of cstablishit\g a self capable of activating and tappit\g from within the Çmystic truth origi.nally inherent it\ all living beings." Looldng back on the history of Buddhism, even though the Lotus Sutra has taught the awakening to this mystk truth, over time people lost sight of its existence within their own lives. It was in that context that T'ien-t'ai established the meditative practice for observing the mind based on the principles of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life" and the "mutu.ally inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena." He thereby sought to enable people to summon forth the world of Buddhahood. T'ien-t'ai's meditation of observ.ing the mind could be viewed as an appropriate practice that restored the correct path of the Lotus Sutra. Further, in order to enable all people to perceive and actualiz,e the "mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings," Nichlren gave it the name Myoho-renge-kyo and established the prac.tice of invoking that name-the practice of chanting Narn-myoho-renge-kyo. By doing so, he opened the way for all people to dedicate their lives to and live based on the mystic truth. Thus Nichiren established the means by which all people can awaken to the truth of life and the universe within their own lives and actively manifest that truth. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no mat.ter what his or her background. It would be no exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This prac.tice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fundamen.tally transform our Lives. In other words, to chant Nam-myoho-renge.kyo is to summon forth our own innate Buddhahood.5 It is the direct path to manifesting that highest state of life. The wisdom and com.passion of a Buddha that emerges through chanting enriches our life-condition, and brings happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as more and more people come to chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha and to ultimately transform even the destiny of humankind. Salute to the Rise of the Buddhism of the Sun Another point we should bear in mind regarding the true meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it is also the name of the life of the Buddha of the Latter Day, Nichiren Daishonin. Nam.myoho-renge-k-yo and the life of the original Buddha are indivisibly connected. We could say that the fundamental truth of Myoho-renge-kyo that pervades life and the universe was only iden.tified and established for the first time through Nichiren himself practicing it and manifesting it in his behavior. He gave concrete e:cpression to the law that people had not been able to perceive up to that point Nichiren's life as the Buddha of the Latter Day is a life dedicated to battling evil and vanquishing ignorance. The struggle to free people from all misfortune and misery in the world-from all negative karma and the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness and death-ultimately entails battling the fundamental darkness or ignorance that gives rise to all evil and suffering. 17 On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime _,______:,.:.:..:..::::::.:.:.::::!...:.::.::.::.:.:..=-=:..:.:...:.:.:._;_:______________________ i lluddbilt ICriptwa.From the lowest to the highest, the realms of (1) hell, (2) hungry ,pirita, (3) animals,(4) asuras. (S) human beings, (6) heavenly bciDp, (7) 'Wlicc-bara-1, (8) cause-awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and --¥¥lillp wol¥ l. Nidlia DlillllliD wrilll:-illil ..... j -tbal die .,._,...., .... *..,_lwl_......,.._, __ {10) Jluddbaa. flom the ftllldpoinl of the Lotus Sutra, the Ten Worlds indi.'lmlillp1-611 ¥.¥ 1w wilbia It m c ¥iMc tile Tm Waddii..S die dne cbuusaad--.1111111Jadimc¥-alllml."u,Dflrwbopraclic:atllifuwwill obraiabca *-¥diedliav/BedchhooclnsicmdswrMlr"nl-rllc ,-.,o1111cw,llki..w.-WND-1 ¥ .z1J. 1. Trw-,ecsolalpllmalpeaa-711ellllimlltlnadlormlitytu,.._... ,....,,llffl nenadlliaaonwa,tcp11a1efromdaem.Apriadpleap,a,cd 111 . ..,_,-die. dlaplÇadie LGtu1Suua. 1a die writ... tided "11ic 'mar A,pca ol All l'lirmmcna." Nidlirm ddimd ¥111 pll,1.NncN" ¥dliriagbcq, aad lbcir CDriroamcalailldie Tm Worklt, Cllel&capocmtial stata or conditions that a person can manifest orWIIID6e,._.-.ilgdlepliadpk.llld-.-.-111a11 apcrimce.nAllo inducla die conaptofthenine worlds, which indicates all ................ diillllllladcdul lillp1-1..,.J 1bat e I ¥. ,--llllda -¥ 6a 1...i,..S Jwaamed it tbe lllWldl other cban Buddhas. Suua."WND-1, 887). As Nichiren indicates when he says that the Nam-myoho-rengc-l-.1,0 he chants for the hap.piness of self and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu clears "the douds of ignorance" (see "'The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms," w1,rn-2, 85), Nam-myoho-renge-kro tru1r has the power to dispel life's darkness. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-l...1¥0. the sun of Bud.dhahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and delusion, like hea,áy clouds shrouding the sun, are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance vanishes. But NIChirm Bnddbim1 is not a teaching in which Nidmn alone shines like the sun. lt is a teaching . which aD of us an bring the sun of Bnddhabood 10 min omma just as he did. We aretmlybbdiain1baltwecau DJIDDrSt"tbe same bdlliant ..... ofBurJdbabood ISNimirm. Jn this nprd, )wnihn wrm:s: ""When one anbnca and has illilh in this Gohonmn. and L c ¥1.r.....-¥...,-nar._...._.....ailtmlife ¥acti-:W..-¥llil5i=Wr¥ --.-nae ... ¥flllrta.Smal ............¡illllllllllcr..S penlliml.' .laaaalils¥diil priaciplr.¥ ,t chants Nam-myoho-rcl\gc-kyc>, one's life immc.diatdy becomes the object of devotion of three thousand realms in a single life-moment. It becomes the life of Nichiren Daishonin."11 The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the supreme path to attaining Buddhahood through which each person can become a shining sun in his or her own right. The great nineteenth-century Russian poet Aleksandr Pushkin sings: "Before the bright dawn, even so / Shall flicker and die every sophistry jaded / At reason's unperishing spark. / Salute to the sunrise, and vanish the dark!"7 Nichiren Buddhism is the Buddhism of the sun that opens the path of life's supreme victory for all humankind. With "Salute to the sunrise!" as our rallying cry, let us dynamically advance in the struggle to dispel the darkness of ignorance in people's hearts. 0 mdawal wi!b the potmtial to become Buddhas, and can tap and manifest dmpateDlial. The 'Jen Worldsare tm distinct raJms or categories of beings referred to in4. 6. Commm"'1y on th, "Tiu Object of Devo1io11 for Observi11g the Mi11d," in and-_ tnwupÇr'" die 1-cl...,._.,.Jc,o. die IWIIIIII rallly pcrmlillf all firiAI bciap ,adlbcir -r,IDan,a(the Tell Worlda.Allpbcanmeol.lwllalal.r-ifaclliamllldli6uaiffl'UInS-: pbcaocnma 111d lht 1lkilluMIndia ,ad --41111. The (Tok)v: ScikJv Shimbwuha, 1980), p. 548. 7. .AJaiaDdrPlllhkin. l'luhkin Threefold; Narrative, Lyric, Polemic, a,uJ Rib,il,I V,,11,uanalaled by Waller Arndt (New York: E. P. Duuon and Co., Inc.,-,,u,1,Jc-.Man,"cbapc,rdarifia thetnllla lhat all pc,uplc me lnbcrcadr 1972},p.20. 18 Key Points Uncovering People's Inner Potential The point where Buddhism radically departs from many other philosophies and religions is that it uncovered within the individual's own life the Law, or limitless inner power, for resolving all suffering on the most essential level. A Buddha is one who, based on this Law, has attained the ultimate wis.dom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and construct indestructible happiness. Buddhism is a teaching of unparalleled humanism that stresses the boundless potential within human beings. That's why it is called the "internal way." (p. 13) The Mystic Truth of Life and the Universe The cosmic life enfolds and pervades everything, and because it does so, it is also inherent in all things. The oneness ofthe cosmic life and our indi.vidual lives lies at the heart of the "principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena." To awaken to this mys.tic truth is to attain the Buddha's "unsurpassed enlightenment." (p. 14) The Meaning of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Chanting Narn-myoho-renge-kyo enables each per.son to actualize a way of life based on the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo. The crucial point in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an external truth. It constitutes a practice to actually summon forth the inner truth that pervades the universe and our own selves and live our lives in accord with that truth. This practice could be described as a process of establishing a self capable of activating and tapping from within the "mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings." (p. 16) Establishing a Buddhism of the People Nichiren established the means by which all people can awaken to the truth of life and the universe within their own lives and actively manifost that truth. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on that truth, we can Jead lives of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth accessible to anyone, anywhere, any.time, no matter what his or her background. It would be no exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhjsm gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This practice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fun.damentaJly transform our lives. (p. 17) The Direct Path to Manifesting Buddhahood To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to summon forth our own innate Buddhahood. It is the direct path to manifesting that highest state of life. The wisdom and compassion of a Buddha that emerges through chanting enriches our life-condition, and brings happiness to ourselves and others.. Further, as more and more people come to chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha and to ultimately transform even the destiny of humankind. (p. 17) Causing the Sun of Buddhahood To Rise Within As Nichiren indicates when he s.,ys that the Nam.myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the happiness of self and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu clears "the clouds of ignorance" (see "The Doctrine of the Three Thousand Realms." W'ND-2, 85), Nam.myoho-renge-kyo truly bas the power to dispel life's darkness. When we chant Nam-myobo-renge-kyo, thesun of Budd.hahood rises in our hearts. The igno.rance and delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the sun> are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance vanishes. But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching in which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We are truly fortunatein that wecan manifest the samebril.liant life-stateof Budd.hahood as Nichiren. (p. 18) 19 ¥1f You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, You Are Not Embracing the Mystic Law" &al 1bough you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law u outsick ,omse1t ,ou are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior tnc:bing -iafrriortnctring" means those [Buddhist teachings] other than this (IGtml sutra, which are all apeclient and provisional. No expedient or provi.sional teaching leads directly toenlightenment, and without the direct path to en&ghtenment you cannot attain Buddbahqod, even if you practice lifetime after lifmmc for countlaskalpu. AttainingBuddhahood in this lifetime is thm impnaoJe. Tileraore, when you chant myoho and recite renge, 1 you must mmmon up deep faith that M.yoho-reng..kyo is your life itself. ("On Attaining Snddbabood in 1'b.i5 Lifetime," 77,,Writings qf Nrdtiren Daisho,un, vol. J, p. 3) To chant Nam-myoho-renge--k.yo is to com.vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance mune with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist and become one with the Mystic Law, its infinite practice for fusing our lives with th.is Law. power unfolds in our lives. Such is the immeasur.At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the able benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. inner darkness that prevents this fusion from tak.The essence of this practice established and ing place. When, through our practice of faith, we propagated by Nichiren Daishonin is to chant 20 Nam-myoho-renge-kyo filled with a seeking spirit to continually develop our faith or confi.dence in its power. "It is the heart that is important:' Nichiren asserts ("The Strategy ofthe Lotus Sutra:¥ WND-1, 1000). When it comes to chanting, therefore, we should above all strive to summon forth the courage with which to over.come illusion without being defeated by the "three obstacles and four devils."2 Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the ultimate mystic truth, and Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the life-state of Buddhas who embody and reveal this truth. Thus, when we chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo with conviction, the infinite benefit of Myoho-renge-kyo unfolds in our lives. This is what it means to bring forth the world of Buddhahood. At work here is the principle of "cause and effect in a single moment of life,"3 in which faith is the cause and manifesting the life-state of Bud.dhahood is the effect. When we continue chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo through times of both suffering and joy while striving for our own happiness and that of others, we can estab.lish as the core and innermost essence of our lives the benefit of the cause and effect for attaining Buddhahood-which are themselves contained within the practice of chanting. "When we do so, the indomitable state of Buddhahood emerges within us. This is the meaning of "attaining Bud.dhahood in this lifetime." In his treatise "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind:' Nichiren states: "Shakya.muni Buddha, who has attained perfect enlightenment, is our own flesh and blood. His practices and the resulting virtues are our bones and marrow" (WND-1, 365). He explains that to embrace Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself attaining enlightenment} The power of chanting Nam.myo.o-renge-kyo enables us to actualize cause and effect in a single moment of life-that is, faith (cause) leading to the manifestation of our Buddhabood (effect). Considered in this light, one's voice chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the voice of unshak.able faith and seeking spirit that breaks through the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is also the courageous lion's roar that issues forth from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of chanting. The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is not only thevoice of faith of ordinary people; it is also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we should always try to chant resoundingly, with a vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop.ing horse. It can also be said that the chanting of Nam.myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities of Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to return to our true, original selves and tap the innate life force that we have possessed from time without beginning. Nichiren declares: "There is no true happiness for human beings other than chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo" ("Happiness in This World," WND-1, 681). This happiness. he says. is the "boundless joy of the Law."5 "Joy of the Law" describes the unshakable happiness and peace of mind inherent in all existence. To experience this joy means to fully savor and enjoy the infi.nite life force that is one with the Mystic Law. Nich.iren explJ.ins that the only way for us to taste the joy of the Mystic Law is th.rough chant.ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 2 1 On Attaining Buddhahood In This Lifetime The Mystic Law and Incomplete Teachings Given that chanting Nam-m)'Oho-renge-lq'O has such profound meaning, it is crucial to remember when we chant that Myoho-rengc-lq'O is our lives themselves. If""lose sight of this point, then no matter how mudl "" may chant, we will have dcparttd from the pnctia ofchanting taught by N"icbircn Daisbonin. Therefore. in ¥on Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," N"achircn writtS in strm warning, "'Ew:n though J011 daant ad". in Myobo..if you think the Law is outside yourself, youm embracing not the Mystic law but an infe.rior tr&hing¥ (WND-1, 3). "'lnfmor¥ here means ¥incornpier,¥The Mystic law is the ultimatetruth dlllis pafmand ,m1,pku;.amttast,"an incom.plert tm:bmg 5Cl5 bib onlya panial truth. lbc .-passage mmains ¥ profonod phi.losophy tbal ovammes 1J11eof the serious pitfalls to which religion lcDds to s11m1rnb. It also cmbodia a aucial philosophy offaith for attain.ing genuine bappinm. Rdigion is gmmDy held to be a universal endeavor to cmmect the human being to the infi.nite,absohne and uaed. While in a ICllSCthis may be true. it seam that many religions postulate from the outset a separation between the secular and the samd. and between human beings and godsorBuddhas, andthus seek to bridge that gap. N"ichircn. however, regarcil teachings that view the absolute or saaed as separate from human beings as incompldc:. And hecites as an wmple the provisional. pre-Lotus Sutra teachings,which do not set forth the principles or practices that enable ordinary people to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Rather, they espouse that one must first undergo innumerable blpas¥ of austere practice before enlightenment an be achieved. In the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, a ,irtually insurmountable gulf exists between Buddhas and ordinary people. Only a very few exceptional practitioners who, after having undergone austerities for countless kalpas, can even attempt to reach the goal of enlightenment. Moreover, according to these teachings, it is inconceivable for someone who has become a Buddha to go back to being an ordinary person. As a rule, according to these teachings, the world where Buddhas dwell is not this strife-filled saha world where ordinary people reside. Buddhas and ordinary people are completely separate. There.fore, as long as that divide exists between the world of Buddhahood and the nine worlds ( the realm of ordinary beings), it naturally follows that there is no way for all people to attain enlightenment In this worldview, ordinary peo.ple and the idealized Buddhas are poles apart, thus leaving ordinary people with no option but to aspire for salvation through the assistance or intervention of such Buddhas. This perceived separation between the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood7 is demol.ished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life".in other words, the teaching that "the nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds" 8("The Selection of the Time," WND-1, 539)."Here we can see the immense importance of the Lotus Sutra principle of the "mutual possession of the Ten Worlds." Nichiren opened the way to actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to attaining Bud.dhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This constitutes in its fullest and most complete form the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlighten.ment for all human beings. Summoning Forth and Manifesting the Buddha Nature The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the universe. Its universality transcends our individ.ual selves. As indicated by its description as the "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all liv.ing beings," however, the Mystic Law also exists within our lives ("On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,"WND-1, 3). It both resides within us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in our lives because it is the all.embracing L1w that pervades everything in the universe. In his writing "How Those Initially Aspiring to the WayCan Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus Sutra," Nichiren explains the essence of Myoho-renge-kyo as follows: "As for the meaning of Myoho-renge-kyo: The Buddha nature inher.ent in us, ordinary people; the Buddha nature of SCI President Ikeda with Brazilian Association of Municipalities President Jose do Clrmo Carcia, Tokyo, July 20, 2006. Brahma, Shakra, and the other deities; the Bud.dha nature of Shariputra, Maudgalyayana, and the other voice-hearers; the Buddha nature of Manjushri, Maitreya, and the other bodhisattvas; and the Mystic Law that is the enlightenment of the Buddhas of the three existences, are one and identical. This principle is called .[yoho-renge.kyo" (WND-1, 887). Not only is Myoho-reng.kyo our own Bud.dha nature, he says, but it is also the Buddha nature of all heavenly deities, voice-hearers, bodhisattvas and o on. Moreover, this Buddha nature is identical to the Mystic Law to which the Buddhas of the three existences-past, present and future-are enlightened. ichiren then goes on to explain that the chanting of N:un-myoho-renge-kyo is a practice in which we "summon forth and manifest" the Buddha nature inherent in the lives ofall beings of the Ten Worlds: "Therefore, when once we chant 2 3 On Attaining 'B uddhah ood in This Lifetime Myoho-rengc-k,'O. with just that single s×\md we summon forth and manifest theBuddha nature of all Buddhas; .all .-istcncts; all bodhis.itttvas; all voice-hearers; all the deities such as Brahma, Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and the myriad stars; the heavenly gods and earthly dories, on down to hell-<iwcllers, hungry spirits, animals, wras, human and heavenly beings, and all other lning beings. This blessing is immeasur.able and boundless" (WND-1, 88i). R.cgarding the mmung of dlanting Nam.myobo-rmgt-lJO. be further states: ¥when we l't'\'m M,oho-mige-k)-o inhemlt in our own life as thr object of dcwtion. the Buddha nature within mis summoned fonb and manifested by om chanting of Nam-myobo-rmge-kyo. This is what is meant by'Bnddha'¥ (WND-1, 887). The expression ¥is summoned forth and manifcstccr points to the profound significance of the Mystic law. Nicbircn uses a wonderful metaphor to aplain dus princip)e of calling forth and reveal.ing the inner Buddha natuR: "When a caged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky arc thereby SUDllDOlltd and gather around, and when the bilds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in the cage strives toget out" (WND-1, 887). The siJJgiDg of the caged bird refers to the chanting of Nam-myobo-renge-k)'o by ordinary people who, shackled in the chains of fundamen.tal darknesi and earthly desires.arouse faith in the Mystic law. lo other words, it is the chanting of Nam-myobo-rengc-kyo with faith, which is expressed as the determination to win ovtr all obstacles and become happy without fail through the powerof the Mystic Law. The power of such strong. determined chantá ing calls forth the Buddha nature in all living beings. Not only does the Buddha nature of Brahma and Shakra and of the Buddhas and boohisattvas throughout the universe manifest, but those chanting Nam-myoho-rcngc-kyo can also sever the chains of fundamental darkness and illusion, and reveal their own Buddha nature. ln other words, it is the power of our voices chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that connects ourlives with the Mystic Law pervading all phe.nomena of the three thousand realms.9 In "Letter to Niike," Nichiren further explains the significance of chanting through the analogy of a mother bird and an egg.10 He says that the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is "like the warmth of the mother bird" (WND-1, 1030). At firstthere is nothing inside the egg but liquid, but as a result of being warmed by the mother bird, the beak, eyes and feathers are formed. Eventually, the baby bird breaks through the shell and hatches, and is soon flying into the sky like its mother. In this analogy, the substance within the egg repre.sents the Buddha nature of living beings, while the mother bird represents the Buddha who leads others to enlightenment. The chanting of Nam.myoho-renge-kyo is at once the voice of faith of ordinary people and a function of the life-state of Buddhahood. Nichiren's most important admonition in regard to attaining enlightenment through chant.ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that we must not view the Law as something outside ourselves. If we think the Law exists externally, then we are reverting to the kind of divide between Buddhas and ordinarypeople found in the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings. Perceiving That One's Own Life Is Nom-myoho-renge-kyo The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has immeasurable beneficial power. Josei Toda, the 24 L second Soka Gakkai president, described the infi.nite power of the Mystic Law as follows: "It is like lying sprawled on your back in a wide-open space looking up at the sky. All that you wish for imme.diately appears. No matter how much you may give away, there is always more. It is never exhausted. Try and see if you can attain this state of life." Indeed, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can be likened to a "wish-grantingjewel." How can we develop the boundless state of life that enables us to bring forth whatever strength is necessary? President Toda often used to say, "If you really want to achieve such a state of life, you have to fight with every ounce of your being for the Lotus Sutra, for kosen-rufu!" Such was the vast and untrammeled spirit of my mentor: the spirit to strive forever together with the Buddhas of the three existences and with the life-affirming functions of the universe such as Brahma and Shakra, wherever in the universe we might find ourselves; the spirit to actualize a world of happiness and peace dedicated to value creation, by helping people overcome misery and misfortune and the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness and death. Throughout everything, Mr. Toda steadfastly continued to seek the Law that exists nowhere but within our own lives. And he stressed the importance of living true to oneself. His starting point was his profound realization in prison that the Buddha is life itself and his awakening to his identity as a Bodhisattva of the Earth. He also often spoke of the spirit of faith we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law with.in us, saying: "You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is your own life!" or "Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day means firmly believing that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myoho-renge-kyo!""' This is the spirit Nichiren teaches in the passage, "When you chant myoho and recite rrnge, you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself"' ("On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life.time,"WND-1, 3). A Universal Religion for the Happiness of All Humankind Generally speaking, religions expound some infi.nite and eternal entity that transcends both human beings and the impermanence of this world, using such terms as Godor law. Oifferent religions regard this infinite and eternal entity variously as a source of fear and awe, an object of adoration. a great void of emptiness or a wellspring of all-embracing love. Nichiren Daishonin saw the power of the Mystic Law that encompasses and sustains all things in the universe as existing within human beings, and he established a means for actually manifesting that Law in their lives. During my second lecture at Harvard Univer.sity (in September 1993), I proposed three areas where Mahayana Buddhism could contribute to modern civilization: ( l) in fostering the creation of peace; (2) in paving the waytoward the restora.tion and rejuvenation of humanity; and (3) in providing a philosophical basis for the symbiotic coexistence of all things. In connection with the second point, I stressed the important significance of the approach of Nichiren Buddhism, which teaches neither an exclusive reliance on the "power of self'nor on the ),ower of other."This perspec¥ tive bas resonated deeply with many scholars. 25 On Attain ing Buddhahood In This Lifeti me Only by communing and fusing with the power of other-whkh is eternal and tranSc:cnds our limited, finite selves--.--an we wholly activate the power of self. At the same tirnt, howe\'er, this eternal, all-ffl<X>mpassing power ofother h"1Ually exists inherently in our lives. Nkhiren writes: ¥People arc certainly sclf--empowe. and yet they arc not sclf-cmpowettd ... People arc cer.tainly other. and yet they arc not . ("'The Meaning of the SKRd 'J'eacbings of 1ht Buddha's Liilime,'" WND-2, 62)." What dais means.llM:lieve, is lhat bytelying L -0...,_,..a .... ,.,,._.die ....... or ___ _,_.,_lar Na:., .. ..... 2. ,__...__ ... ,.a, -.-pllClictaflM+ismt'-t....... .__, .. _,..h_mlh. 1. e.-e-a6::taa-.te-d'llfe:nispillciple.._ .. lbt--a6ctd...._.dft t., dailtialbths ¥¥,-,le¥adaw.fiida..tpllClict.._.cmlbtU,..lic1-aaellie ._.....,,flllllle¥¥llllillluddbnood -a 1 ¥.¥tlir-itfll....,.,..¥llmlimmhiD f f I .u,ar.. J¥¥¥illllfe itl ¥nt111cU,..lic 1-if6r6c1 ,,,..bwllly¥il:l111l laddlmduoupoul ..,_, ¥"'---cz[j ec'idlilapm:med dwM,-1-mllil-.lie¥¥ ác !iti.dwcoaam -.hcldleC....,_11whcill;.:thl!F6ri rt:!hclewaciml. a-tiag 111119 .,_... l:J,u wilb failh .ill daisGabomm C .ile+sdarpradiae411f----.w¥¥mi.dhia oalerhto llllli. Wchhood.,. paa:eitizl die M,llic Lawwidaiacme'a OWD life. n..ii dw principleáhá-.. -'le,...,_. ia melf aaaiaiagcntipln--,r¥ s. ._._.oldwl.-:'Dlilmmaodwbawlithcme._rn... ed cizg die M,-1-. h daaibmdll' mliahrawJ wof a llad6a.lalmwririll"lllppimaiD111i1 ...... Nidliam1111a: "1bar is aonueblppillllafDr bumm bciopadic:rtblllc:baDliag .h1be (Lolul] .-a tadi, ¥ ....... !iring8-Jll!lwabcinp eapydaemldwa ¥ -111ar 1-s Sidrll-' /ls o,.,.-4a..,--.p.mJ. Haw'111111dtllil ,_. _-,tbiaa bar die bouDdlca joy of tbr Law!"' (WND-1, 611). 6. AnmnmelJJoagpcriodmtime.Sulrllaodllaliladi&ria tbeir dc:fioition',buthblpufall iotorwoma,oratcpries, dlOleofmcu.unhleaod immealllrablecluratioa.O,,..nplenatiMalflltbeleaglbof a 1111111 lwpa at appRllimaldy 1bsommi11ioa neither exclusively on the power of other nor on the power of sdf, we can manifest the power that exists within us yet transcends our selves. Chant.ing Nam-myoho-Tenge-kyo enables us to do this. In this way, Nichiren Buddhism opens up a broad new vision of a universal religion for the happiness of all humankind--one that tran.scends the approach of teachings that strictly divide external power and the individual's own powct and that emphasize one over the other. 0 aakingitpoaible to interpret them as potential states of life inher.eat io each individual being. I. -i1ae nine worlds haft the potential for Buddhahood and Buddha.bood reblins the nine worlds¥: This means that that the lives of beiDp in the Dine worlds-the worlds from hell through to bodlti.. endowed with the world of Buddltahood, and that the liws al Buddhu are also endowed with the nine worlds. In other wmm,ordinary people and Buddhas are essentially the same with DO ilillin ttioo between them. 9. 'llueetbouand realms in a single moment of life is a philosophical s,-m allblilbedby Tien-t'ai. The "thrtt thousand realms" indi.Clla die urying apects and phases that life assumes at each 1111J111eDL At each moment. life manifests one of the Ten Worlds . Eadlhofdiaehwodds possesses the potential for all ten within itself, dms muiDg one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred wmlds . the ten f'acton and operates within each of the dne lalms of aiatencr,,thus making three thousand realms. 10.Nidmen DaisboniD writa: "A bird's egg contains nothing but liq.uid. yet by itself this developa into a beak, two eyes, and all the otber parts, IOd the bird soars into the sky. We, too, are the eggs of iparaac:e, whim are piti6d things, but when nurtured by the dwating of Nam-lll)'Oho-renge-kyo, which is like the warmth of die modier bird, we dewlop the beak of the thirty-two features and the fatben ofthe eighty characteristics I of the Buddha] and are file to IOU into the sky of the true aspect of all phenomena andtberalityohD tbinp" (¥Letter to Niike,-WND-1, 1030). 11.N"x:biren DaisboaiD ltata: "Now in the teachings of the Lotus Suua. people arc ccrtlinly aelf-empowered, and yet they are not sdf-cmpowen,d. Thia i, because one's own self, or life, at the same time poueua the nature of all living beings in the Ten Worlds. 11ierefore thil ldfbu from the beginning been in the possession of Ac.cording o.ne'a owu realm of Buddb¥bood md of the realms of Buddhahood pouaaed by all Olher living beings. Therefore when one attains Bocldbeboocl nne doa not take on some new or 'other' Buddha ¥Again, IDtheteachingsof the Lotus Sutra, people are certainly 7. The Ten Worlds are tea dutioct ralma or calqjOria ,. beiap otber-cmpowacd, and yet they are not other-empowered. Thertfemd to in Buddhist Kripturu. From the lowest to the bigbac, Buddlw, who are c:omidered aeparate from us, are actually con.themlnuhof (l) hdl. (2) hungryipiriu,(3) IIWUla, (4) as111111, (5) llined within our own llelva, or the lives of us ordinary people. hlllllm beings, (6) bcaVtnly beings,(7) voia-heatcn, (8) ame.1'hOie BuddhasIJllJlifest the realms ofBuddhahood of all living awak.cncd ona, {9) bodhisanvu and (10) Buddha.The Lotus beiopio tbc 1ame mmner a we do¥ ("The Sacred Teachings of the Sutra tcachei that each of the Ten Worlck cont.aim all tea within it, Buddha', Lifetime;" WND-2, 62). 26 Key Points The Meaning of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to commune with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist practice for fusing our lives with this Law. At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the inner darkness that pre.vents this fusion from taking place. When, through our practice of faith, we vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance and become one with the Mystic Law, its infinite power unfolds in our lives. Such is the immeasurable benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (p. 20) The Cause and Effect of Attaining Buddhahood The power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to actualize cause and effect in a single moment of life-that is, faith (cause) leading to the manifestation of our Buddhahood (effect). Considered in this light, one's voice chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the voice of unshakable faith and seeking spirit that breaks through the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is also the courageous lion's roar that issues forth from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of chanting. (p. 21) Chanting Like a Galloping Horse The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is not only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we should always try to chant resoundingly, with a vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop.ing horse. It can also be said that the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities of Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to return to our true, original selves and tap the innate life force that we have possessed from time without beginning. (p. 21) Bridging the Cap Between Buddhas and Ordinary People This perceived separation between the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood is demolished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of"three thousand realms in a single moment of life" -in other words, the teaching that "the nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds" ("The Selection of the Tune," WND-1, 539). Here we can see the immense importance of theLotus Sutra principle of the "mutual possession of the Ten Worlds." Nichiren opened the way to actualizing this latter principle, whkb is the key to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by estab.lishing the practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. This constitutes in its fullest and most complete form the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlightenment for all human beings. (p. 22) Manifesting Our Inner Power That Transcends Us The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the uni.verse. Its universality transcends our individual selves. As indicated by its description as the "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings," however, the Mystic Law also e.'<ists within our lives ("On Attaining Buddhahood in This lifetime," WND-1, 3). It both resides within us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in our lives because it is the all-embracing Law that pervades everything in the universe. ( p. 23) Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Is Your Own Life! [Mr. Toda] also often spoke of the spirit of faith we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law within us, saying: "You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho.n.ng.kyo is your own life!" or "Propagating the Mystic law in the latter Day means firmly believing that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myoho.renge--kyo!" This is the spirit Nichiren teaches in the passage, "When you chant myoho and recite renge, }'OU must swnmon up deep faith that Myoho-renge.l)'O is your life itself" ("On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," WND-1, 3 ). (p. 25) 2 7 {4} Transfonning Our Fundamental Attitude...,,,_,,To Live an ¥Endless, Painful Austerity" ´all .... -.r 6iak 6at any of the eighty thousand sacred teachings of sa-,.........,.c 1ifrrirne orany of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas ofthe ten clia:tims .a tlmr aistmca ve outside yourself. Your practice of the BocM+ttndringswlnot n&venyou ofthe sufferings of birth and death in dielastaam,aapcra:ift the truenature of your life. If you seek enlighten.mmt 111nsWrn,-,.l{, thaa yourpaforming even ten thousand practices and tm thc.newl pod cleals wiB be in vain. It .is like the case of a poor man who apmds nigbtad clq CDllllling his neighbor's wealth but gains not even halfa min. 1mt is why the T".am-t'ai school's commentary states, "Unless one per.mwatheDIIDRofone', life, one cannot mdiate one's grave offenses."1 This passage implies that, 11111mone percava the nature of one's life, one's prac.tice will become an eocUm,painful austerity. Therefore, such students of ferent &om those of non-Buddbista. Wbdber you chant theBuddha's name,2recite the sutra, or merely offer ftowers and inr.eme, allyour virtuoua acu willimplant benefits and roots of goodness in your life. With this conviction, you should strive in faith. ("On AtUining Buddhahood in 1'hii Lifetinu:." nieWrttmg, uj N1d11rt11 Daislu111i11, vol. I, pp. 3-4} The character myo of myol,o, or "Mystic Law," has three meanings: to be fully endowed, to open and to revive.' These three meanings are all implicit in chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo. In other words, the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo contains ( l) the myo of perfect endowment-meaning that the single Law of Myoho-renge-kyo encompasses all phe.nomena; (2) the myo of transformation that "opens" the world of Buddhahood in the lives of beings in the nine worlds ( the worlds from hell through bodhisattva); and (3) the myo of great benefit, whereby a life filled with suffering is "revived" as a life of great tranquillity and joy. Our lives themselves are entities of the Mystic Law. Therefore, they are fully endowed with all phenomena. Fundamental darkness and the enlightened Dharma nature,1 earthly desires and enlightenment, and the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood-all of these exist within us. For precisely that reason, we can carry out a mystic and fundamental inner "revolution"-changing darkness into light; kindling the flame of enlight.enment by "burning the firewood of earthly desires" (The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, p. 11) and thereby manifesting the world of Buddhahood in our lives of the nine worlds. The key to achieving this profound inner transformation is our hearts-our fundamental attitude or mind-set. Therefore, Nichiren Dai.shonin warns in "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime": "If you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching" (WND-1, 3). When we diligently exert ourselves in chanting am.myoho-renge-kyo based on this admonition, always remembering that a change in our own hearts or minds is crucial, the three meanings of myo will clearly manifest themselves in our lives. Needless to say, the Law contained in the prac.tice of chanting spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. But even the power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest in a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that prevents us from believing in the Mystic Law and staying focused on our own Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of chanting enables us to break through this darkness and vibrantly bring forth our Buddhahood. Battling our funda.mental darkness-this inner struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Studying Buddhism Yet Succumbing to Non-Buddhist Thinking In the passage we are studying this time, i ichiren Daishonin strongly cautions: "You must never think that any of the eighty thousand sacred teachingsof Shakyamuni Buddha's lifetime or any of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten direc.tions and three existences are outside yourself" (WND-1, 3). The use of the word never here is deeply significant This passage e.xplains that the entirety of Buddhism is contained within our own lives. Nichiren concludes that "the eighty thou.sand sacred teachings of haJ...y.ununi Buddha's lifetime" and "the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions and three ex:istences"s are all phenomena inherent within us. ichiren goes on to say that as long as we seek enlightenment outside ourselves, even our per.forming "ten thousand practices and ten thousand good deeds" (meaning all of the prac.tices expounded in Shakyamuni's lifetime teachings) and believing in the protection of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the three existences (meaning the benevolent functions of 29 . . vud'J'1ahood in This Lifetime An important point in this writing is that we as Nichiren Buddhists also run the risk of falling into non-Buddhist ways of thinking if we seek the of Buddhism-erises from fundarnmtal darkness or igoorancc. In T"im-t'm .., Budcfbipn,it is only poss1"ble to eradicm 1his . through the practic.c of observing0116 mind-m 01Da' words, through wisdom. In Nidum1 Boddbism,l:aowewr, funda.mmtal darbm can be ovamme by the sharp sword of mdi m aamd with the principle of .substituting faith for wisdom... This is the essmcr of the practicz of chanting Nam-myobo.renge-kyo.To map, if wese6 enlightenment outside of us, wearenot pursuingthepath of ¥observing one's mind,¥ which enables us to ovaaxne the fundarner,tal evil of ignorance or darlmtM. ID that case, all our dforts and good deeds to attain enligbtcmneot will be lacking the vital .ingredient; they will be every bit as futile as c.ountiog a neigh.bor's vast riches. Moreover, becaU$e none of cbese Law outside of our own lives. Hence, as Nichiren Daishonin's disciples, we must always bear in mind his admonition "You must never think that any of the [Buddha's] teachings ... are outside yourself" (WND-1, 3). Thechanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a practiceforrevealing the "originally inherent mystic truth"7 that exists in all people and achiev.whyNichirenis so strict on this point efforts will help us eradicate our ignorance, they will only bec.ome "an endless, painfulausterity." This battle against ignorance is the aninnerstruggle.If we allow ourselves to beheartof wecannotbringforth our enlightenment. That is Buddhism. It is said that Shakyamuni's enlighten.ment lay in identifying darkness orignorance as why battling the darkness or ignorance within us is an unavoidable part of the process of becoming a Buddha. In other words, whether we continu.ously battle our innate ignorance is the single most important determinant in whether we attain Buddhahood. As such, it is something we must never forget. By engaging in this struggle, we can reveal the Buddha wisdom within our lives and thereby confront and overcome our ignorance. But if we fail to undertake this struggle, ignorance will shroud and conceal our Buddha nature. Igno.rance deepens and exacerbates the five delusive inclinations of greed, anger, foolishness, arro.gance and doubt within us. That is what happens if we succumb to the erroneous view that the Law is outside ourselves. Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime Naturally, the Gohonzon-the object ofdevotion in Nichiren Buddhism-in itself is great beyond measure. A passage from Nichikan's Six-Volume Writings9 that states: "Even someone who has not yet aroused true faith will still receive immense benefit through connecting with the correct object [of devotion, namely, the Gohonzon]" (Rokkans/Jo, p. 81). The true lineage of faith we inherit in the Soka Gakkai is what opens up this infinite and bound.less power of the Gohonzon. Faith as practiced by the Soka Gakkai entails an active struggle to man.ifest the Mystic Law in our lives; it also produces clear actual proof of benefit. When we advance together with the Soka Gakkai, we naturally come to internalize the correct practice of faith as taught by Nichiren Daishonin. Therefore, those who sincerely chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo to the Gohonzon and practice and participate in activities with the Soka Gakkai cannot fail to become Buddhas. The purpose of faith is to freely reaJize our full potential and shine in our own unique way. That's why it's important to keep advancing and challenging ourselves, to have the spirit "I will exert myself in my practice! I will deepen my faith! I will do my best as a mem.ber of the Soka Gakkai." This is the certain path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. áwith this understanding, let's concretely and strictly apply to our daily practice Nichiren's admonition"If you think the Law is outside your.self, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching (WND-1, 3). To seek the Mystic Law somewhere outside of us essentially amounts to evading responsibility for our own lives. Practicing Nichiren Buddhism means not being swayed this way and that; it means con.structing a self that is solid and resolute like towering Mount Fuji. But if we neglect this task and focus our energies somewhere else, before" we're even aware of it, we can end up veering onto the path of externally seeking the Law. For e.'<ample, if we chant to the Gohonzon but always blame other people or our environment for our circwnstances, we are avoiding the chal.lenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment out.ide of us. By chmging ourselves on a more profound level, we can begin to improve our situ.ation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that change. lt is also important that we don't fall into the 31 . . Jhahood in This LifetimeBud'"1 says, "You must summon up deep faitliÈ (WNn.1 3), if we hope to make our inherent lluddh. ature the basis of our lives--or as Nichirenn we must continue striving to deepen our faith, our conviction in chantin g Nam-myoho-renge.10ch¥sional Buddhas ofthepre-Lotus suttatea mgs l-yo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as Because our practice of faith is aimed at attainingBuddhahood in this lifetime, it is essen .tial that we have a solidly focused attitude when chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like trying to shoot an arrow: without a clear target, we won't cases, quite frankly, faith is simply somethingpeo.draw the bow with any real force or determina.tion. In the same way, when we replace vague yearnings with concrete determinations and con.fident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what WC hope to achieve. Grumbling and complaining are the principal gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe.lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of ourselves. Shouldsuchbehavior become habitual, Wllhout a struggle, however, we cannot dittaly engage the gears of our human m'Olution. To use the analogy of mountain climbing. if we just walk around thebase of the mountain and never actually attrmpt to ascend its slopes. we'll never reach the-summit, no matter bow much time passes.If we avoid cbaUmging nm own issues, we can never strengthen and develop ourselves, and we won't be able to attain Buddbaboodin this lifetime. In addition, it is important that we try to rid our lives of ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe.lief as weJJ as grumbling and complaining The erroneous belief that Myoho-rcnge-kyo ( the Mys-.tic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core an inability to believe that all peop.ursdves and otbers----posscss the Buddha nature. And this disbelief stems from fundamental darkness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to .skeptically regard the Buddha nature as "'a nice ideal but one that doesn't really change reality" .vill manifest itself as prayer that is vague and :1cking in conviction. If our efforts in faith arc alfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally spurs ustorealizehappiness for ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people have the potential for Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra, not only won't we accomplish our desire to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up committing slander of the Law.11 Also, unless we practice together united in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind," the great desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled. 12 Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves and others is the true means for attaining Bud.dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the potential to become a Buddha. The Spirit of the First Three Presidents Pulses in the Soka Cakkai A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of the Law in each person's life is one that treasures the individual. It calls out to each person, encour.ages his or her individual human revolution and seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the appearance of one person after another embracing faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily emerging from the earth to propagate the Law, and the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.t' This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first three presidents-Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei Toda and myself-have steadfastly followed. That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phe.nomenal development and why our kose11-rufu movement has spread throughout the entire world. In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the Law as existing outside one's own life tend to be authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and repress people. Theyare prone to emphasizing rit.uals or clerical authority, while their followers passively seek to assuage their anxieties through dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak.ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings' greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have come to function almost exclusively as purveyors of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, devolving into what is known as "funeral Bud.dhism." They offer no philosophy that empowers people or enables them to live better lives. The Soka Gakkai 's founder, President Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a "teaching for transforming one's life.'" To believe that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo e:cists within us is to have the confidence that we will definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working for kosen-rufu through sharing Nichiren Bud.dhism based on the conviction that it holds the key to happiness for both ourselves and others. This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the first three presidents' spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this most difficult of challenges-that of awakening people to the Law within. President Toda used to say, "You should resolve, 'I am .lyoho-renge¥k')'o!"' The Mystic Law is the "highly effective medicine" ( Tl1e Lotus S11tra and Its Opening and Closing S11tras, p. 269) that relieves the sufterings of all people. It is also 33 On Attaining Buddhahood ln This Lifetime trap of practicing "dependent fuith:' where we pin our hopes on having our prayers answered through the divine or transcendent powers of gods or Buddhas. This is a typical example of ' d epe n our faith,. . ¥ tviewing the Law as outside oneself. The provi.sional Buddhas of the pre--Lotus Sutra tcachings10 readily lend themselves to this kind of faith, the essence of which is escapism. Even when they're ob,iously suffering, people confident and concrete prayer. of dependent faith avoid looking at their prob.ple hide behind as they avoid dealing v.-ith reality. Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly Towt1hcanalogyof mountain climbing, ifwe just walk around 1llle base of the mountain and we hope to achieve. never aaua1ly IUm1pt to ascend its slopes, we'll lief. Even if we know it is wrong, wemay find DN:l'ieachthemmrnit,TIOmatterbow much time can nm:I's1mlgthen 111d develop ourselves, and we won't be able to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. In addition. it is important that we try to rid cause us to forget about advancing an d imprová our lives of ambiguous. elusive doubt and disbe.ing ourselves. We will then effectively close off ou r lief as well as grumbling and complaining. The own poten tial, falling into the path of seekingthe erroneous belief that Myobo-renge¥kyo ( the Mys.Law outside of us. While it might be a real chal.tic Law) aists outside of our lives bas at its core lenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can an inability to believe that all people-ourselves derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these tende ncies and use them as a sprin gboardand others-possess the Buddha nature. And this disbeliefstems from fundamental darknt.ss.ln tams of attitude in faith, this tendency to Let's also strictly guard against slan de rin g our skeptically regard the Buddha nature as ¥a Diet ideal but on e that doesn't really change reality" will manifest iuelf as prayer that is vague and lacking in conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted. we cannot change our attitude or the Law externally. Our Buddha nature is what fundamen tally spu rs us to realize happiness for 32 ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra, which teaches that al] people have the potential for Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra, not only won't we accomplish our desire to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up committing slander of the Law. 11 Also, unless we practice together united in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind; the great desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.12 Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves and others is the true means for attaining Bud.dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the potential to become a Buddha. Th e Spirit of the First Th ree Presidents Pulses in the Soka Cakkai A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of the Law in each person's life is one that treasures the individual. It calls out to each person, encour.ages his or her individual human revolution and seeks to lead all people to enlightenment In the appearance of one person after another embracing faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily emerging from the earth to propagate the Law, and the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.13 This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the fust three presidents-Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei Toda and myself-have steadfastly followed. That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phe.nomenal development and why our kosen-rufu movement has spread throughout the entire world. In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the Law as existing outside one's own life tend to be authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and repress people. They are prone to emphasizing rit.uals or clerical authority, while their foUowers passively seek to as.suage their anxieties through dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak.ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings' greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have come to function almost exclusively as purveyors of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, devolving into what is known as "funeral Bud.dhism." They offer no philosophy that empowers people or enables them to live better lives. The Soka Gakkai's founder, President Makiguch.i, asserted that ichiren Buddhism is a "teaching for transforming one's life." To believe that the Mystic Law of .lyoho-renge-lq¥o exists within us is to have the confidence that we will definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working for kosen-rufu through sharing ichiren Bud.dhism based on the conviction that it holds the key to happiness for both ourselves and others. This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the first three presidents' spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this most difficult of challenges-that of awakening people to the law within. President Toda used to say, "You should resolve, 'I am Myoho-renge-kyo!"' The Mystic Law is the "highly effective medicine" (The Lotus S11tra a11d Its Ope11i11g and Closing S11tras, p. 269) that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also 33 , £ . lives with the Mystic Law. succession of problems. But áwith the firm belief that our lives arc Mvoho-renge-\..')'o, we should strive to boldly challenge everything with the unwavering com-iction that áwáe can overcome all hardships and beoome happy without fail. When we maintain deep faith based on the foundation "Yi0u shouing days of our movement: a no ,,the Latter Day. Wm in life 'w1 that ¥I am Myoho-renge-1-")'0," we cantake on any depreciatemust absolutely never . . .Nichiren Buddhism starts romproblem with courage. The key to victory in life 0li£e-condi .that the supreme tion".exists in each of us. It is a teaching that possible for us to achieve the £.roioundest 1nJ1 lrrespectM, transformation-a transformation of our emphasizes the importance of our minds, 0 dHe writes: "Whether you chant the Bud name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers an incense, all yourvirtuous acts will implant bene.ts of life ofthose who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and dedicate their lives to the Mystic L aw. Nichircn Daishonin says. .. [My] disciple& cannot accomplish anything if they are cowardly" ("The Teaching, Practice, and Proof,"' WND-1, 481). ln 0 34 I. Miao-lo, T/1e /\111wtntio11s 011 "Great C<mce11trntion and /might." 2. As used here, "the Buddha's name. denotes Nam-myoho-rcnge-kyo. 3. Three meanings of mycr. In "The Daimoku of the Lotus Sutra," Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Myo means to be fully endowed, which In turn has the meaning of'perfcct and foll'" (WND-1, 146); "The character myo means to open" (WND-1, 1'15); and "Myo means to revive, that is, to return to life" (WND-1, 149). 4. The unchanging nature inherent in all things and phenomena. 5. The tendirections refers to the entire universe, all physic¥l space. Specifically, the tendirections are the eight directions of the com.pa.north, south, east, west, northwest, northeast, southeast and so.thwest-plus up and down. Buddhist scriptures refer to the existence of Buddha lands in aU directions throughout the uniá verse, each with its own Buddha. The expression the Buddhns of tl1t te11 directioru in the sutras indicates these Buddhas. The phrase ten directio11soften appears with the phrase three existences, meaning past, present and future existences. "The Buddhas of the tendirec.tions and three existences" thus means all Buddhas throughout space and time. 6. Substituting faith for wisdom: The principle that faith is the true cause for gaining supreme wisdom, and faith alone leads to enlightenment. 7. Originally inherent mystic truth: The fundamental Law, Mystic Law or Buddha nature with which all life is originally endowed. 8. Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. 9. Nichikan was the twenty-sixth chief priest of Taiseki-ji, the head temple of the Nikko school (also known as the Fuji school). He is revered as the restorer of Nichiren's teachings because he worked to clarify their true meaning. During the four centuries after Nichiren Daishonin's death, a number of errors and misconceptions had arisen aJ his follower. !plit inro m .. ny Khools. NichikJn worked tirelruly to clarify the true meaning of Nichircn's teachings-He completed cxegc,es on Nichirm'J five major writings and other work$. and authored The Six-Volume Wrltinp. which distinguishes the correct interpretation, of Nichiren's tai:hings from mideading ones. 10. The provisionJI tc-Jchings that preÇded the Lorus Sutra do not teach thac the world of Buddhahood aist.¥ in all .pie, and instead dc:Kri. Buddhas ;u idcJ.!ized ¥nd ruperior brings. The Pure Land (Ncmbursu) r..achin.forcxamplc,c:cplain that instead of relying on ont's own efforu. one should cxclU5ivtly .nd on salvation through such a BudJh.-namely. Amid.I. 11. In "The Fourteen Slanders,W Nichirm writtS: -rhctt 3 a differt'.llCc if one chanu thed¥imoku while :Jding ag;iinsr the intmt of this sutra ... Alw;iys remember that bdit'Vt'fS in tM Lorus Sutra should absolutely be the la.st ro ab. one another. All those who keep fuith in the Lotm Sutra arc m. certainly Buddhu. and one who sl.m.dcrs a Buddha commits¥ grave offense" (WND-1. 756). 12. ln "The Heritage of the L'lrimatc Law of Llfc.¥N',chircn writ,s: "All disciples and lay supportt'D of Nichirm should .t .m.myoho-rcnge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but one in .ind. transcending all cliffermu:s among them. 10 bccorn< as tn5ep.arablc as fish and the water in which they swim. This sp1ri1wl bond is thc basis for the universal ttan.Smis.sion of wultim:lte L,w of life and death. H=in Ii. the . goal of N'ichircn'.s propaga.tion. \\-'hen you are so united. evm the great desire for widespread propagation c;in be fuJfilte<nWND-1,217). 13. In "The True Aspect of All Phaiomma.¥ :-:ichiren writes: áAtfirst only Nichirrn chanted Nam-myoho-rmge-kyo. but then rwo. three. and a hundred followed. chanting and teaching othcs. Prop.agation will unfold this wayin the future as well. Doo:s this not signify'cmerging from the earth'?" (\.D-1. 385). Key Points: The Essence cf Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo The Law contained in the practice -0f chanting spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. 'But even the power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest in .a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that prevents us from believing in the Mystic Law and sta)ing focused on our own Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of chanting enables us to break through this darkness and \'ibrantly bring fonh our Buddhahood. Bat.tling our fundamental darkness-this inner struggle is theessence ofchanting Nam-myoho.rcnge-l.1'0-(p. 29) The Heart of Buddhism Ifweseek. enlightenment outside of us, we are not niceskeptically regard the Buddha nature as "a '' willideal but one that doesn't really change reaI¥ity manifest itselfas prayer that is vague and lacking 10 conviction. lf our efforts in faith are halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally .ttransform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he says. "You must summon up deep faith" (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inherá ent Buddha nature the basis of our lives--<>r as Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this pursuing the path of ""observing one's mind," -wbicb enablesus to ovcrc.ome the fundamental evil of ignorance or darkness. 1n that case, all our efforts and good deeds to attain enlightenment will be lacking the vital ingredient; they will be every bit as futile as counting a neighbor's vast riches. Moreover. because none of these efforts will help us eradicateour ignoranc:c. they will only become ¥an endless, painful austcity." This battle against ignorance is the bean of Buddhism. (p. 30) The Driving Force for Our Transformation If we cb.a.nt to the Gohonz.on but always blame other people or our environment for our circum.stances, we are avoiding the challenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment outside of us. By chang.ing ounclves on a more profound level that we can begin to improve our situation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the drivingforce for that change. (p. 31) 36 faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myohoá reoge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43) Overcoming Grumbling and Complaining Grumbling and complaining are the principal gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe.lie( Even if we know it is wrong, we may find ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual, it will act as a constant brake on our growth and cause us to forget about advancing and improving ourselves. We will then effectively close offour own potential, falling into the path of seeking the Law outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these tendencies and use them as a springboard for pos.itive growth and development. (p. 32) [s} Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a "Brave and Vigorous" Spirit.Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas' emancipation in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands, pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of our minds. It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar.nished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a dear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature! and the true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo. (¥On AttJining Buddh.i.hoo-1 in Thi. Lifotimt." The \\'ri1111gs v/N1,hiw1 LJ.i1.:,/1.,11i1. wl. I. p. -1) 37 :he Vimalalcirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas' emancipation lil the minds ofordinarybeings, one finds that ordinary beings aretheentitiesof enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It .so states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also impure, hut if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands, pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of our minds. It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is called an ordinary being,but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar.reflecting the essential nature ofphenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the true aspect ofreality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror dayand night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyoo, ("On Attaining Buddh,ihoo,l in ThisLif,átim.," 'J'/1,á \.'ri1i11i:s of Nichirc'II D11isho11i11, vol. I, p. 4) 37 On Attaining Buddhahood In This Lifetime ¥ the entities of fbirth ofenlight.be. . are the entiti. esrdin . for attaining mfests in the)imparting inspiration.e. and <XRlnlgC. uyg in earthly . f .birth dano ddha life.)ill'ty (nirvana le tor-th and cleatofcan bring forth that powa-anywhere. anytime ir'beBuddhas mented by the sufferings , and d byean .insur..thing settingmountabledivide;that the 0.1 Y "minds of o m the renge-kyo as its core practia.This time. rn discuss the pmage in whichNichircn Daishooin outlines the basic attitude the diffe renceVirnalakirti Sutra that expla¥ms ¥between pure and unpure Iands¥ This passage.. d 1s als oliving beings th ¥ 1are impure, eir an and approach to our fundamental practice ofchanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. f .their1¥5 Changing Ourselves 30?,lands; the only difference between pur:and Changing the land impure lands is"the good or evil of our mmdse.The view shown here is one in which the pure As I have already touched on at length, the landdoes not exist in some otherworldly realmentirety of Buddhism exists within our own but in therealworld,and is achieved by peoplelives. And the keyto attainingBuddhahood--theultimate transformatio n of our life-state-also changingthemselves inside.This is adynamicandpracticalviewofthe pureland, based on theidea of"topwifyBuddhalands"expounded Openingand Closing Sutr11s, p. l l 7). 38 ange between váLma .Buddhist lay beltever and practitioner of the ¥rh, an outstandingexch 'bodhos falle. ill, an. Manju.y o shri, one of Sh : .o_aky muni s leadmg disciples¥ whois vá .¥1s1ting him¥ When asked the cause of his repries, " Because all living. , eretiore I am sick."4 This is a wn passage that succinctly reveals theamentalffi bodhisattva spirit of takingfund on . goes on to say that bodhisattvas e born among living beings afflicted are m the sufferings ofO sám or er to instruct and guide enlightenment. More.emgs to oflife as are never overwhelmed or y uffenng, because they have estab.from the Vimalakirti _oneeded. Nichiren likens this supreme state a dear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even Law. wes, the passages _ra cited bY N' to ichiren clarify the meaning of hting .lysticthough we are an entity of the forth the power of that La-w if our In such acannot bring shrouded in ignorance. a b..hisattva practitioner fig; lives are e realities of daily life. Nichiren, there-am.that will not reflect anything. Chanting myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the tarnished mirror of our lives. f,oreo, one is called a Buddha" (WND-1, 4). In f.ple and Buddhas is nothing more than the The Path for Polishing our Lives: ( 1) Brave Challenge. chant.transform delusion into enlightenment? ich.iren Daishonin says with regard to In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains our lives: "A mind ing as a practice for polishingthat when people's hearts change the land or clouded by the illusions ofthe innate dark.now .heir external environment canal.o change. At a tarnished mirror, but when ness of life is likeits foundation is a transformation from delu.become like aclear mirror, polished, it is sure to sion to enlightenment. formation possible is the practice of chanting imlfet e Th.ls.L..:_::::..:...------..B.u .dd.l 1.a.h o.o.d.i!!_n . on Attaining-l-restoringthemirror',innateproperty.More.over, just polishing a mirror once i5 not 40 . desert .10g spin of both suffering and joy. The emphasis here is .mner on the word continue, and it is key that we do so throughout "both suffering and joy." \Vhen con.fronted with suffering, we must not retreat. \.Ve should "suffer what there is to suffer." This is nei.ther resignation nor escapism. \Ve need to fi.. obstacles and four devils that seek to obstruct us from chanting Narn-myoho-renge-kyo. We our gaze unflinchingly on reality and bravely need to have a fearless, tireless and unremit.challenge it based on chanting Nam-myoho.ting challenging spirit to confront and renge-kyo. Nichiren is e..laining that this is the overcome the diverse array of obstacles that correct attitude for practitioners of the .fystic Law. Faith in Nichiren Buddhism is constantly directed toward transforming reality. Of course, such a state of life is not gained overnighL But if we steadfastly and diligently continue making efforts to polish ourselves day in and day out. month after month, year after year, we will naturally and surely come to attain it. mirroring the words of the sutra passage "This cluster of unsurpassed jewels / has come to us unsought" (LSOC, 12-1).' Ne.xt. "enjoy what there is to enjo. (\VND-1, 681),can be taken to mean that when we're e.-q,e.riencing joy, we should remember to have gratitude and make even greater efforts to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, aiming toward the ulti.mate goal of attaining Budd.hahood in this lifetime. Deepening our seeking spirit in fuith is much more difficult in good times than in bad, because in good times it is easy to grow lax and On Attaining l3uddltahood In This Lifetime self¥satisfied. Rather than being someone who is strong in adversity but weak when things are going well, we sho. seek to construct the kind of invincible faith that allows us to "oregaro both suffering andjoyas facts oflife" (WND¥ l, 681 ). Such strong faith is forged through ourprac¥ tice as Soka Gakkai members striving to adueve the lofty goal of..rufu and our own cnlight¥ enment in this o:istenre. Above all, chanting NanMnyoho.renge--'kyo-the process by which we "diligently polish. OW' minor day and night" (see W?'\T0--1, 4}-strcngthcns our lives in the same way that a magnificent sword is forged and tempered. The crux here lies in chantingwith the spirit to challenge in times of suffering, and chanting with appre.ciation in times of joy. "C.Ontinuing" is anotherway of saying"not regressing."Throughout the pages of Nichiren's writings, we can see his emphasis on never regressing or backsliding in faith. To cite but a few passages, Nichiren writes: "One . . . who chants the daimoku, is the Thus C.Ome One's emissary. Also, one who perseveres through great persecutions and embraces the sutra from beginningto end is theThus C.Ome One's emis¥ an unshakable state of life that is one with the Dharma nature (namely, the Jife.state of Dud.dhahood). This is because if we "slacken in our resolve even a bit" (see WNDál, 997), as Nichi.ren ,mtes, we will become vulnerable to life's negative influences. Also, when we exert ourselves in faith, the three obstacles and four devils inevitably arise. It is by defeating them that we can establish the life.state of Buddhahood. When we polish our lives on the most fundamental level through the practice of chanting Nam¥myoho¥renge.kyo, we can deepen, strengthen and broaden ourselves spiritually without limit. "Nam¥myohoárengeákyo Is a Diligent Practice" Nichiren Daishonin strove to share the supreme inner state of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime with all his followers-and indeed all humankind. The true greatness of the practice of chant¥ ing Nam-myoho¥renge¥kyo is that it enables sary' ("The Farther the Sourc.e, the Longer the Stream,¥ WNO. 1, 942); ¥strengthen your faith day by day andmonth after month. Should you slackm in )'OUI' molve even a bit, devils will take advantage¥(-OU Persecution Befalling the 5age,¥oWND-1, 997); md ¥Carry through with your &ith in the Lotus Sutra. You cannot strike fire from Ointif )'OU stop halfway' ("F.arthly Desireso.Are EaJigbtenment.,¥oWNo.1, 319). Without a battle to conquer ignorance or darkness, we cannot manifest the essential nature of phenomena, or Dbanna nature. And unless we continue to wage this battle through each person to actually manif est the same . eemting ourselves in faith, we cannot construct ,----------------------------------" Praying for Brave and Vigorous Youth To Appear Exerting oneself means doing so bravely and vigorously. Without courageand vigor. there is no true exertion. The first Soka Gak.kai presi.ted Teach".á l 'fi gence or tireless exertion. those who exert themselves assiduously to seek 214)-then the life-state of the Buddha eternal.instant. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice. to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering single-mindedly and consistently in this practice steadfastly chant. will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this Diligently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent morning and evening, let us thoroughly polish Buddhnhood-the Buddha eternally endowed ourselves inside and construct lives in which we with the three bodies-wells forth in the form win victory after victory. of inexhaustible courage, perseverance, joy, wisdom and compassion. 0 43 t11. \runabJdrti Sutra: A Mahayana sutra arout \limalakirti. a "'fflth)' .nd prominmt ciriun of the city ofVaishali at the time ofShat..1'lm11nt. In tcnlrll ofl,irth and d<"Rth ht suffi.-rs Hines.<. lflivingbeingsct1n 811111 re1ensc .l\llnilln.', then the ho..lhis.111\18 will Ill) longer be m.á n,c vá1"'111¥1lirr1 'c the sutra. \'imalakirti "'f'mt!IIS the iJnl Mahayana lay N'ht'\"1', The Sanskrit original of this sutra is 1101 cnant, but there arc thrtt Chi..translations., indudinfi one by Kumaraji\-a, whkh i. the most rorular S. The Vimalnlirti S11tn1, p. 65ff. i.. In "Interpreting the Tei11\ascd upon Its EMcntial Meaning¥I ,¥ ¥ N'ááL'a¥ ' a trea1lscof\N11111t \nrm. iu,1kan 1vntcs: "You should und. ,'to cxcn OOC5('1fbm-cly and 11goruusly (sec I.SOC, 56á ' ll>n 'l'fflion and the ,.'Ori. u..á rtferml to ,.,i,m th. title is mtntionro. 2. Here. Nichircn Daishonin summarins pa. from the Vimalakirti Sutra and the Great TMcr T'icn-fai', rmn-n--e to it. "Inquiring About the m,_"the fifth d\artcr ofthesutra.rontains the follo,,1ng . crstnnd th ta y1111,yo sl,ojin) rctcrs to faith and to chanting Nam-myoho-rcngc-kyo¥ It ti. 1crcforc each'1ng =han. "'And ht,,.á is the emancipation of the Buddhas to l,e 50ught1' askcd l\tanjushri. 'It .-t,e ..ht in the minds ¥¥¥ of an li\1ng brings.' rcpliNI \'imalakirti." TIit \'i>Mlol-irti Suma. tnM. by Bunon Watson from the Chineoe ,<cr.QOn b)á J:umaraiiva <Ne--York: Columbia uragcá. (vigorously) means to expend all one's wisdom'¥ Hence, 'braveyUni,ttsity Press. l99i), p. 66. and vigorously'describescourageously bringing forth the poweroffuithln his Grt<1r Cm,anrnarion tlndl1t.<igl,t. T'icn-t'ai ,.-ritcs: "'.>,.::cording to the fullest o.1enL Shojin (to exert on=lfl indicates the practice ofto the \r unalalirti Sutra. the cman.:ipation of the Thus Come One chanting daimoln1. A commentary therefore states: 'Slio (pure) meansmould be solJSht in the minds of li,-ing beings. Bcause living bci.ngs unadulterated; jin (effort) means ceaseless advance.'" art entities of cnlignmment. it is not something to be obtained. Because I the birth and death of] livin& brin. art nin-ana, [birth and 7. These words art an exclamation of joy when Shakyamuni's voice. death I are not cxtin.iQled. Emancipation amead)¥ cxiS1s in the heart hearer disciples learn that they can in fact attain Buddhahood, which of one and the hearu of all. as do all phenomena." had pm-iously bttn denied to them. 3. This =mary is based on the pusasc. .'hen the mind is pure, the 8. The thrtt bodies of the Buddha refer to the Dhanna body, the reward Buddha bnd ..,11 be pure." Tht li'imaJal.mi Sumi. p. 29. body and the manifested body. The Dhanna body is the fundamental 4. \runaWcirti ays:-&causeall ln,jng beings art sick. thcrdorc 1 am sick. truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is If all m-ing beings arc . of sid:ncss, then my sickness ..-ill be the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the com.mended. \\'hf. 8eause the bodhi'31M for the sal:r of ln-ing bcings passionate actions the Buddha carries out to lead people to happiness. SGJ President Jkeda's Lecture Series The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life A series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda onNichiren Daishonin's writing -rbeffedtage of the Ultimate Law of life." Nichiren states:"Shakyamuni ......,"'Ibo attained enlightenment countless kalpas ago, the Lotus Sutra 'lllllt iads all people to Buddhahood, and weordinary human beingsarein -.rardfferent orseparate from one another. To chant Myoho-renge-kyo ,... ... .,ullzaticm Is to Inherit the ultimate Law of life and death." .. .-.o,JJ ¥ SS.95 Leaming From the Writinss: lhe HorÈ-fflled Teachings of Nichiren Daishonin A,.,_dlec:llns bv SCI President Ikeda on IS writings from Nichiren A1lstloeln,aJndudlng 'Winter Always Turns to Spring," "The Dragon Gate," "The Sfraregy of theLotus5utra¥ and ¥Lessening One's Karmic Retribution." President NICHIREH OAISHONIN flceda states in Che Introduction to this lecture series: "The writings of Nichiren DllshonJn fully elttddlll this philosophy of hope aswellasits practice and prool. They n a source.of Illumination that endlessly encourages and inspires ¥.. Let usstriveto read with our llves--Olat ls, to put into practice-even aline orcwo of Nlchlren\ wt1dngs, which overflow with his spirit." SKU 1290992 ¥ SUS Key Points Arousing Deep Faith and Making Continual Efforts The act of polishing is indispensable for restoringthe mirror's innateproperty. Moreover,just polish.ing a mirror once isnot enough. We have to keep polishing it ifwe wish it to retain its reflectiveprop.erty. As this metaphor aptly attests, our practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to polish our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of ransformaf . .ive pnnc1ples of the Lotus Sutra, has111 d . ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our enlightened Dharma nature. This practice of pol.ishing our lives may be seen as having two aspects. renge-kyo as its core practice. (p. 38) One is to "arouse deep faith," as ichiren exhorts Changing the Environment (WND-1, 4). This could also be articulated as sum.Through Changing People's Hearts moning the fighting spirit to battle our in.er Nichir . darkness. The other aspect is to continue making steadfast efforts. in accordwith Nichiren's admoni.ch tion that we should "diligently polish our mirror .alsochange.At its foundation is a transforma.dayand night"(see WND-1, 4). (p. 40)th'nfrom delusion to enlightenment.What makesis t.ansformation possible is the practice ofchaNam-myoho-renge-kyoni:ting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiri.level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can Is a Diligent Practice Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent pr.ctice. _Arousing deep faith and steadfastly conunumg _to chant am-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires constant and unflagging exertion. Perseveri.gsingle-mindedly and consistently in this practice will lead us to attain Buddhahood inthis lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent Buddha.hood-the Buddha eternally endowed with the three bodies-wells forth in the form of ine:c.haustible courage, perseverance,joy, wisdom and compassion. (p. 43) Polishing Our Lives Through Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo All living beings are inherently entities of the Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud.dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin.drance, whenever and in whatever form it is needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a benighted state, we are like a "tarnished mirror" that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam.myoho-renge.kyo is the practice for polishing the tarnished mirror of our lives. (p. 39) either toelist or not to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcendsboth the words and mncq,ts ofaistence and nonexistence. It is neither exis.tence nor11nnmstmc:e, yetmubitsthe qualities ofboth. It is the mystic entity mystic nature oflife, and ho, to its manifestations [the manifestations of themind of myo). Benge,which means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the wewill also understand that our lifeat other moments is the Mystic Law. Thisrealization is the mystic kyo,or sutrL The Lotus Sutrais the king ofsutras, thedirect path to ealigbtenDlCllt, for it explainsthatthe entity of our life, which Mystic Law. r'OaAlllining Budclbahood in Thi&Lifetime,¥ TheWri1i11gsofNid1/re11 Daislw11i11,vol. J,p.4) 46 <Cat is the heart that is important" ("The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra," WNO-I, 1000), writes Nichiren Daishonin. Our hearts, our minds, are trulywondrous and unfathomable. We can expand and deepen the inner realm of our spirit infinitely and boundlessly. mirror reflecting the essential nature of phenom.ena and the true aspect of reality" (see WND-1, 4). In other words, by manifesting the mystic truth that resides within us, we can tap our infinite inner potential. Buddhahood is the state of life that is one with Myoho-renge-kyo, the originally inherent mystic truth. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is also the name of this ultimate state of life. The pas.sage I will discus.s this time explains the relation between Myollo-renge-kyo and the mind of living beings in terms of the elements of myo, ho, renge and kyo. This explanation may be seen as a description of bow our lives become one with Myobo-renge-kyo and manifest the illumámatmg all things, the heart can embrace .ch. anging, like scenes m a drama orlike an unfold-state of Buddhahoocl Let us consider the pro.found meaning of this pas.sage. Buddhahood. Even people weighed down by The Mind Is the Mystic Entity of the Middle Way That Is the Ultimate Reality ¥is one with the universe. This momentous drama Buddhism finds supreme nobility and the Nichiren Daishonin says that myo of Myoho.renge-kyo signifies the marvelous nature of our lives from moment to moment And he uses the concepts of e.-ristence and nonexistence to describe N' h' this wondrous and unfathomable nature. thoroughly polish our lives through chantingNam-myoho-renge-kyo, it is possible for us to tap the life-state of Buddhahood no matter how steeped in delusion we may be, and to transform even the most impure and evil land into a pure land. Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings" (WND-1, 3). Accordingly, through the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can reveal our inner Buddhahood-polishing "the tarnished mirror of a mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness oflife" into "a dear Our minds are in a state of constant flux, moving with the ebb and flow of countless thoughts and emotions. Nkhiren notes: "When we look into our own mind at any moment, we perceive neither color nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for many differing thoughts continually occur. The mind cannot be considered either to exist or not to e.ust. Life is indeed an elusive reality that tran.scends both the words and concepts of existence and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor nonexistence, yet e.'Ulibits the qualities of both" (WND-1,a4). on Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 'lj II Renge Refers to the Principle of theNichiren describes this unfathomable Simultaneity of Cause and Effect nature of the mind as the "mystic entity of the MiddleWay that is the ultimate reality" (WND.1, 4). The Middle Way does not simply mean Nichiren Daishonin ne>..1 states that ho, meaning the middle course between two extremes; 'it Law or phenomena, is the name given to the refers to a more lofty perspective that is swayed manifestations of the mystic nature ofour lives or by neither e>...eme but also embraces them minds--a tem1 that can also be expressed as the both. Shal.")73.llluni set forth a sound philosophy wondrous mind or the "mind of myo." The mind and practice transcending the two then-pre.of myo is itself the Mystic Law. Abstract words vailing e>...emes of hedonism and asceticism, and theories alone-be they the concepts of and he called this the Middle Way. ln "'On nonsubstantiality or the unification of the three Attaining Buddhahood in This lifetime," Nich.truths-cannot be called the Mystic Law. For only iren says that the ultimate truth, which when the Mystic Law is expressed as the higheSt transcends the two extremes of existence and human wisdom based on the Middle Way can it nonexistence and yet also manif csts both, is the spread as a guide and compass, and as a teaching Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of or Law (ho) for people to follow. truth, he calls it the ""ultimate reality." In addition, Nichiren says: ÇRenge, which Transc.ending existence and nonexistencecan means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the won.be taken to mean trcmscrnding impermanent der of this Law,,(WND-1, 4). The Mystic Law is phenomena that alternate ceaselessly between not visible to the human eye. Therefore, the Bud.existence and nonaistena. Further, exhibiting dha uses a concrete symbol in order to help the qualities of both existenoe and nonexistence people understand the Law's wondrous and mys.while transcmding both does not refer to a tran.tic nature. This is renge, meaning "lotus flower." scendent or absolute beingdivorced from Why does he employ the lotus flower? Usually unpermanmt phmornega.butincUcates the truly plants flower first and then bear fruit-a relation.eternal that aacom,.Hes aucl resides within ship that is used to illustrate linear or sequential imy..l.lneata.phrnom,,,, causality, with the flowers representing the cause Although .11'11 ap¥ins the mysterious and the fruit the effect. In Buddhism, this is naameof.life or min4 in tams of the concepts referred to as the nonsimultaneity of cause and of mstnxe and iGftDeristmce in this writing, effect. By contrast, the lotus flower puts forth its wkthe says here isaa,mparable to Nagarjuna', petals and its receptacle (which contains its fruit) concept of nomubttamia1ity,¥andto Tien.simultaneously-in other words, its fruit is pro.t'ai's co. of the unification of the three duced at the same time its petals open. The lotus tru. . th&! threefold contemplation in a thus symbolius the principle of the simultaneity single mind.' Euentially, ¥t1iemystic eatity of ofcause and effect. the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality" of which Nicbiren speaks refers to our lives or minds that are one with the ultimate truth-a concept expressed variously as nonsubstantial.ity, the unification of the three truths. or threefold contemplation in a single mind. 48 ... Buddhist pract'ice"Here, cause and effect are non-bone and marrow of our beings, with flowers of sunuItaneo .The teachings of the Lotus Sutra benefit blossoming in our characters and in our lives. This is the mystic kyo in terms of our indi.however' cJar'fyi that all people are oriuinallyendowed the state ofBuddhahood and canWI'th vidual lives. reveal it Also, we can regard this mystic kyo as the spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to deIuded ¥ tran fis ormed Into the m¥md of myo (the supreme others. When "the mind at this moment" is nen)'ightenme"t) . . f a Buddha. The lotus floweT understood to mean the Buddha's mind and "the0 5Ymbolizes mind at other moments" is taken to mean the minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the Buddha's teachings that expound aspects of his enlightenment regarding the mystic nature of life, or the mind of myo. And the king of sutras that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the essence of which is Myoho.renge-kyo. In that sense, the development of e Mystic Kyo Nichiren o . h . . "sutra,,, .of Myoho-renge-kyo also refers to reahz.ing the m . Und Yshc nature of life. He says: kosen-rufu, with people propagating the Mystic"If weerstand that Law and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for their own happiness and that of e at this moment is m,vo, also understand that our life at other ourthen we will mo .rnents is the M others and teaching others to do the same. couldystic Law. This realization is the mystic k:o, or sutra" (WND.be said to correspond to the mystic kyo.1, 4). en With a Chmese character indi.'1 As seen in the aforementioned discussion, catmá Myoho-renge-k-yo is the law inherent in our own lives. The ongoing moment-to-moment transfor.mation in our hearts and minds that we achieve ertic thread, or warp, in a loom or ¥t is also used to refer to the passage off.ab . 't.....i....ue"_"N'1ch¥1Ten speaks ofour livesespect,.r rn1nds at this moment and our lives or minds 0 through chanting Nam-myobo-renge-kyo not only leads to a fundamental inner change but to aer moments. Our lives or minds are con.¥ or ignorance, through strong faith change in the entire way we live our lives, putting us on track to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. And it further creates a groundswell for the great transformation of all humankind that is kosen.renge-kyo, the innate mystic truth appears within rufu. The dynamic force for change on all levels is US, and the life of Myoho-renge-literally, lotus of Myoho-renge-kyo.the Mystic Law-blooms within our hearts. Day by day, through consistently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can accumulate the Becoming the Masters of Our Mindscauses and effects for attaining Buddhahood that make it possible to transform a mind clouded by the innate darkness of life into a mind rdlecting the essential nature of phenomena and the true aspect of reality (see WND-1, 4). The virtues of these causes and effects over time bÇom. the The priests of the various Buddhist schools during Nichiren's lifetime had forgotten thisor, even worse, we may succumb to negative and destructive impulses.Thisis a problem stemming spirit of Shakyamuni. Following their own arbi.from the subtlety of the mind. Because our minds trary minds or thinking, they lost sight of the are the key to attaining Buddhahood in this Buddha's teachings, denigrated the Lotus Sutra lifetime, we must overcome our own inner weak.and succumbed to arrogance. By contrast, Nichi.nesses. This is what our Buddhist practice is all ren taught that the true master of the mind is about.The deluded minds of ordinary people are Myoho-renge-kyo-the heart of the Lotus Sutra constantly wavering. We must not make such and the fundamental Law of all Buddhas-and wavering minds our basis or guide. Nichiren Daishonin emphasizes this by citing the well-known passage ..Become the master of your mindrather than let,our mind master ,ou¥ cá1.ettertothe Brothen,áWND-1, 502).This pas.sage is from tbeaSixah¥amitas Sutra.which states toatbeaeffect-oaiamindsaJDlfsudcleoJynm out of contmL n, fi.ae,1111e111111tmne tllelll like a wild dcphaot, ..,. minds to become our .,__...._lmtadm-¥ rting10amara ourminds.¥¥ 111c Niaw Salra cwt¥rs & aimilar passage, ¥¥ ;beaam mllfffaÇ111Jamind and not Jet my mind :hemme -, m,ser,P' ("'l.elta-ato Raijo: ) -.."C..a.:-...a.,:_ _,, ¥¥WNl)...2,a.5 ¥ .,,J!QUIVClll _ a15usa Mlffli'lllfflOn, many .y face, we can break through them without having a sound a,mpaas in life and die bright beacon ofmth. Wcmmtnot 1,,-mastered by ordi.nary people's incomtant.weak JS a a against our own inner w andever..dJanging eaknesses.N:..L:_IUWCD teaches that to win in th1ás bb attIe, we of the Buddha essence of the Lotus Sutra-the Mystic Law of eing swayed so Based on the Law my mentor in my heart. This is the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple. Those who hold fast to their spiritual mentor as their com.pass and exert themselves as that mentor teaches are people who live based on the Law. Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching founded on the oneness of mentor and djsciple. And the Lotus Sutra is likewise a scripture of the oneness shonin ¥mstructed, they could overcome their .d' hordealá, of mentor and disciple. At the end of this writing, to convey the . of their father taking faith. Toá allow ourselves to be mastered by our importance of the mentor-disciple relationship in walking the great path of attaining Buddha.hood in this lifetime, Nichiren cites a passage from the "Supernatural Powers,. chapter of the . mately, we will be pulled this way and that by our constantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism and sink ¥into the depths of darkness or igno.rance. Conversely, to become the master of our Lotus Sutra.7 Next time, I will discuss the pro.say here that the path to attaining Buddhahood is found in the practice of Bodhisattvas of the Earth who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the Law inherent in their lives. for both theiA teacher or mentor in Buddhism is one who r others to do the same. Above all, the great path to attaining Buddha.hood in this lifetime-lies in practicing faith with .ready exists within their own lives. The disciples In turn seek the mentor, who embodies and is one With the Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple, they exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. making our minds one with the lofty mind of the Budd.ha and not being swayed by our in.In this way, they lead lives in which they become ner darkness or the three poisons-greed, anger and In other words, the existence of a mentor.foolishness. Faith based on the mentor-disciple one who embodies and lives in complete accord spirit is the key to opening the treasure within with the Law, and who teaches people about the our lives that is as vast as the universe. Moreover, vast inner potential they possess-is indispen.courageously exerting ourselves in chanting sable for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and taking action for kosen-rufu is the direct path to attaining Buddha.hood in this lifetime. 0 On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime I.Nagarjuna: A Mahayana scholar of .uthcm India, th,,ught to hl\'t ., . ¥ l .,\,nl('mr 1a11,m 1n a smg c mm d l\l11s11t11tcs the ru,-c org, t IC lh~r,..:"á old11Jlrtlcti..'t. 1llis \\lntcmplati1111 i11"1h-c1 rc1wiving the 11i" ¥ l lh'td i>(twtcn the ytars 150 and 250, "',ho is l'Sf'('ciallr known fur hi. S}"Stcmatization of the doctrine of nonsu.tsnriality. N,,n,,1h.1anti1l.ity is the concept that things and rhcnomcna ha\\' no th'td or independent nature or cxistcna <'f their own. 'Nag.rjuna intcgratc.l 'c 1 lcn,1'n\e 111Hh1 as ,l bnomcoon. l ¥11s tqua to o scrw1g a smg e nhimcnt or1ár, n each "I¥ 1e.¥h 11 h f h I c 811d .ce\ng' one 1>crce1.e1the practical do.."trinc of the Mi.idle Wa}á, tran.nding h<>th 15..-cti.cism and hedonism, and the COncq't <'r dcpm,kn1 origin1tio11 into the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. In other =rd.\. by ,m-.ing an thinss not as entities "'ith an ctml&ll)¥ fitrd nature hut as always al-Su ming a temporary and chan.ng . through their rdation lo other things (i.c. dq,cndmt origination}, one can act ba..<tJ on a true rcr¥ ccption of rcalit}-. "'ithout either attachment or fitrd rrtjudices (i.e., 4. The Six Paramitas Sutra statcs: ¥ir. you arc alwavc,. the 111. . aster or""¥ I /V \ym,vur no111111\drun amok. lt is just like taming an elephant.¥ DharI.e.,) . ¥illino2. Unification of the thrtt truths: Ba.. on the ."tion in Nagarjuna's Trratise on wMiddlc Wa,á that integrates the oon.-q,ts of nonsubstaniTlre 811d.dh ,as __,.....<t n,,.-,-s. .'" . ..¥. The Lo.. . a 1011of Publications, I 995), p. 245. twity, dq,cnlkot origination and the Middk Wi, the Great Tcadlcr ay Tiat-t'ai cstablishtd the doctrint of tilt three truths: the truth of nonsubst3ntwit)¥, the truth of trmporary o.istena and the truth of the Middle Way. Further, ht clmficd that these truths. nthcr than being 5CplfllC and indq,cndmt or one another, -three "'."S of Ryokan. Al the same time, the father tempted Munenaga, the youngerbrother, to abandon his faith and takt his brother's place as the next head of the family. Despite these adversities, the brothers persevered in faith. The fathtt rescinded Munenaka's disinheritance and in the end constitutr an inttgra) "'-hole. ca.:h possessing all thlt'.C -..ithin itself. This is called the unificatiOD of the thrtt truths. took faith in Nichircn's teachings. 7. . passage sutes: *Afttt I IShakyamuni] have passed into extinction/ Ione] should acceptand uphold this sutraJ Such a person assuredly and ourBuddhistcommunity'sabilityto bringhappinesstomorepeople.This abridgedtwo-booksetisawonderful giftforyourselfandtoshare.ith Tribune( '1()Worldv' -Press.Key Points The Meaning of Kyo-the Practice for Oneself and Others We can regard this mystic kyoas the spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to others. When "the mind at this moment" is understood to mean the Buddha's mind and"theam ind at other moments" is taken to mean the minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the Buddha's teachings .at expound aspects of his enlightenment regardingthe mystic nature of life, or the mind o. myo. And the king of sutras that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the Nichiren says that the ultimate truth, which essence of which is Myoho-renge-kyo. In that sense, the development of kosen-rufu, with p.o.ple propagating the Mystic Law and chant:i.g Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for t.m own happiness and that of others and teaching others to do the same, could be said to corre.spond to the mystic kyo. (p. 49) Mastering One's Mind-the Path of Mentor and Disciple Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of being divorced from impermanent phenomena, To allow ourselves to be mastered by our minds is to lead a self-centered e.'cistence. Ultimatdy, we will be pulled this way and that by our con.stantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism and The Meaning of Renge.the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect sink into the depths of darlcness or ignorance. Conversely, to become the master of our minds is to live based on the Law. A teacher or mentor The Mystic Law is not visible to the human eye. in Buddhism is one who leads and connectsTherefore, the Buddha uses a concrete symbol in people to the Law-teaching them that the 1:3worder to help people under stand the Law's w.n.on which they should depend already e."Ostsdrous and mystic nature. This is renge, mearung within their own lives. The disciplesin turnseek"lotus flower:¥ Why does he employ the lotus the mentor, who embodies and is one with theflower? Usually plants flower first and .en bear Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, theyfruit-a relationship that is used to illustrate ¥ sa1á 'th the flowers exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. In this way, they lead lives in which they become masters of their minds. In other words, the existence of a mentor-one who embodies and lives in complete accord with the law, and who teaches people about the vast inner potential they possess-is indispensable for attainingBuddhahood in this lifetime. (p. 51) . . fr ¥The lotus thus symbolizes the pnncap1e1¥ of the {7) Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the Oneness of Mentor and Disciple If you drmtM:yuho-&"eDp-kyo with deepfaith in this principle [ that the entity of,_. Be ii in fact the entity of the Mystic Law], you are certain to allam llpJ'-;¤ t Nin dais lifetime. That is why the sutra states, "After Ihave pa11eaDitoedi+rlw, lone] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a Maintain,-rf.mla aad attain Jluddbabood in this lifetime. Nam-myoho.mip,kyo...--Nichirm("OaAalilaglw!rhh,odia 1'lm JJfctimc;77ie WritingsofNiclriren Daisho11in,vol.I, p.4) B mis follow the path of birds, and fi&h attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime-for all follow the path of mh.. Similarly, there humankind. This path is noneother than the isapathfor ustofollow in life for practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. achieving happiness uhuman beinp. Ordi.The path of chanting Nam-myoho-renge.narypeoplecannoteasilyseethiscorrect kyois, in asense, the mostnatural way for path, but to the Buddha it is uplainu day. human beings to achieve enlightenment. This NichirenDaishoninopenedthe indestruc.isbecause it is the meansforustoreveal the tiblepathtobappiness-the great path of "mystictruth that is originally inherent" in our 54 ¥Nic¥huen emphaslives (see WND 1 3) We may call it the most natural path, how.ever, that does not mean that wedo not have to make personal effort. As with any path, in ordermyo o-renge ky all to enable many people to followit, the way has to be opene. obstructions must be removed and a clear pathway must be trodden. Similarly, the path of chanting entails a struggle to the ital" .,Shakyah tained "tth¥ maintain faith that Myoho-renge-kyo exists within us and to defeat the fundamental dark.ness inherent in our lives.M ese five ch When we embrace the five characters of aracters, we will naturally was. (ÇThe ObJect of Devotion for Myoho-renge-kyo, we can positively transform the cycles of negativity, delusion and suffering that our lives have repeatedly undergone as a b .Ob result of innate darkness or ignorance. We can naturally engrave deep within us the causalityThe five characters of Myoho-renge.kyo do not representthe sutra text nor, for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. .are they át Buddhá1st practice may not understand tbeir significance, by practicing these five characters, they will naturallycon.form to the sutra's intent. ("On the Four stages of Faith and the Five stages of Practice:¥ WND-1, 788) If we do not harbor doubts in our hearts, we will as a matter of course attain Buddhahood. ("The Opening of the Eyes," WND-1. 283) Because Myoho-renge-kyo is the inherent Law otf litfe to which the Buddha became enlightened, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo represents an unerring practice for us to gain enlightenment. Hence, Nichiren says, "You are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetimet'" (WND-1, 4). On Attain ing Buddhahood in This Lifetime WND-1, 4). Indeed, we find Nichiren stressing the importance of faith throughout ..On Attaining Buddhahood in this Lifetime." For instance, he writes: ¥summon up deep faith" (WND-1, 3), and"'Arouse deep faith" (WND-1, 4). He teaches that deepening our faith is the royal road to achieving enlightenment. The key to our enlightenment as ordinary people ultimately depends on how deeply we can believe this truth-that,by manifesting the Mystic Law inherent within our lives, we can definitely attain Buddhahood. áwere They Not Bodhisattvas of the Earth, They Could Not Chant the Daimokuá The kind of faith nccdc:d for attaining Buddha.hoodin this lifrrime could1hus be described as faith that grows aa' . Such faith is ttuly the ballman of Bcdhisau r.as of the F.arth.1 N'lchiren Daishoninwrlta, . bodhi.sattvas arethe oneswo had thoroughly forged their resolft'-in other voids. they possessed ¥thoroughly forged faith¥ (-cic:neral Stone ,iger,¥WND-t. 953). At the end of-oÈAUainingBuddbabood in This Lifetime,¥ N'd>ireu cita thefollowing passage &om the .upematural Powm of the Thus Come One"chapta of the LotusSutra: "After I have passed intoextinction, (one] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way" (I.SOC, 318). He quotes this as scriptural evidence of gaining enlighten.ment through chanting the daimoku {or title] of the lotus Sutra, Myoho-rcnge-kyo. We can read this passage to meanthat the thoroughly forged faith of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is 5 6 precisely the faith required for attaining Ducl.dhahood in this lifetime. 11 chapter,In the ..Supernatural PowersoShakyamuni áBuddha transfers the essence of the Lotus Sutra2to Bodhisattva Superior Prac.tices and the other Bodhisattvas of the Earth. He then outlines how these bodhisattvas should exert themselves in propagating the sutra after his passing. The above passage cited by Nichiren at the end of "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime" is the conclud.ing part of Shakyamuni's description of benefits to be gained as a result of those efforts. Here, "[one] should accept and uphold this sutra" means accepting and upholding the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo--the essence of the teach.ing transmitted by the Buddha to Bodhisattva Superior Practices. In "The True Aspect of All Phenomena:' Nicbiren writes, "Were they not Bodhisattvas of the Earth, they could not chant the daimoku" (WND-1, 385). What is it that makes the chant.ing of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo so difficult then? Viewed from one perspective, it is because breaking through fundamental darkness and triumphing over devilish functions requires us to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with strong, thoroughlyforged faith. Chanting and Teaching Others To Do the Same Further, the true significance of the Bodhi.sattvas of the Earth's practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo lies in their not only carrying out this practice themselves but teach.ingothersto do the same. In other words, it is a practice for both self and others. In his treatise "The Three Great Secret Laws," Nichiren Daishonin notes that, in the Middle Day of the Law, T'ien-t'ai and his teacher Nan-Yueh both chanted the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra, but they did so merely as a private practice and did not teach it to others. Nichiren clarifies that, in contrast, he not only chants it himself but teaches this practice to others.' The daimoku of the Middle Day remained merely an emblem for perceiving the mystic truth; it was not employed to actually lead peo.ple to enlightenment. In contrast, the daimoku of Nichiren Daishonin encompasses both prac.tice for oneself and others-it has the actual power, when chanted with thoroughly forged faith, to break through fundamental darkness and enable all people to reveal their innate Buddhahood. SCI President Ikeda at the November J 0, 2006, Headquarters Leaders Meeting in Tokyo, Japan. Also, in "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mindt Nichiren refers to the practice of chanting that he established as the "actual practice of the five characters of Nam-myoho-renge-k1'o .. (\.'D-1, 375). "Actual practiceÈ here means chanting Nam-mroho.renge-kyo in terms of both faith and practice,¥ and establishing the causality of .Buddhahood as a reality in one's life. The actual practice of daimoku of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of the law means chanting Nam-myobo-renge.kyo for the enlightenment of all people--a practice aiming for the happiness of both oneself and others .. As Nichiren indicates when he says "At first only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three, and a hundred followed, .. the essence of this practice is chanting it ourselves and also 57 hood In This Lffetfn'le ddh a on Attaan1ng Bu -¥¥11ti<)ns like those described in the and pers." ... batred and jca!ousy, slandeeand Lotus Sutra-: and which he explains the principle of attaining Buddhahood inthis lifetime.\\Te must never for.get howNichiren's.a momentous snuggleto propagatr.d be empty intalec1ne1irit thing but tranquil and trouble-free. It .uld be said that the genuine spirit of Buddb ,s111 lies bl.ishmg¥10 eSta a towering, .ble state of life . . that not even the ar.¥e. m this bfet1me True attamment means con-teaching it to others ("Th¥ nu¥ Aspe<I ofAll PhenTheomeNamna,"-mWNyoDho--lrenge-k"}'O chant. by bY e BodhlsattV3S of the Earth is charactenzed thoroughly forged faith to overco.e deep, darkn. and devilish functions. and by practl. for both ourselves and others. Its essence, ID short, is faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. Shortly after Nichiren proclaimed the estab.lishment ofhis teaching, ready and .}ved to battle all obstacles. he composed this -writing, in the six difficult and mne easy acts,¥abuse, N'1c111ren,s true the three powerful enen1ies.6 lifeblood or heritage flows in the mentors and disciples united for kosen-rufu. of the chant of true Now, the sound Bodhisauvaseofthe Earth resounds throughout the world. Without the kosen-rufu-directed faith and obstacle-defeating daimoku practiced and spread by the Soka Gakkai, the practice of Nichiren Buddhism for attaining Buddha.hood in this lifetime would not exist today. amum and Nichiren taught Viewed from the Buddhist perspective, Mr. Toda dedicated his life to demonstrating the state of Buddhahood of one who follows the highest human path. As his true, direct dis.ciple, I proudly proclaim the great victory of my mentor's human revolution. Overflowing With Life Force, Fulfilling Our Mission done so. As long as actual proof of the Mystic Law continues to blossom brilliantly in each person.s life, the faith of the Soka Gakkai will shine eternally. Mr. Toda declared that the life of each Soka Gakkai member would be recorded in future sutras as "Soka Gakkai Buddha." Of c.ourse, each aspect of birth, aging, sick.ness and death is part of the reality of our lives in this world. Our physical bodies cannot escape the changes found inthe cycle of forma.tion, continuance, decline and disintegration to which all phenomena in the universe are sub.discussing th. ¥1s question, Prest ent Toda con.stantly declared it meant securing eternal age. If practitioners of Nichlren Buddhism happiness. "Attaining Buddhahoode" he said were to retain youthful bodies forever, it would C(means achi ¥ ' , eVU1g a state of being that allows us ject. Naturally, our bodies deteriorate as we go against the laws of nature! As we thoroughly polish ourselves through faith, however, the inner essence of our lives will neverdecay. I hope that all our pioneering and senior members who have dedicated themselves to kosen-rufu with such sincerity over the years will cheerfully, proudly adorn the finalchapter of their lives with noble victory, confident of this po.int. Please continue to strive with theMr. Toda continued, "And is it not greaterstill if we can enjoy tens, hundreds, thousands, te.s of millions of existences in this way?" I can .till hear his voice ringing in my ears, filled with mdomitable confidence and conviction like the mighty roar of a lion king. Those who have dedicated themselves to the Mystic Law will, on each successive rebirth, overflow with vibrant life force, accomplish a mission for kosen-rufu that only they can achieve and enjoy immense, indestructible good fortune. They can joyfully savor such lives again and again. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, one could say, allows us to solidly ente.-this eternal path. Countless Solca Gakkai members have spirit of fresh challenge! looking at Nkhiren's writings, there is absolutely no doubt that those who forge such a fighting spirit in this e.xistence do attain the lofty spiritual state allowing them to make their way freely, joyfully, through the journey of eternal life. In describing this free, untrammeled state of life that continues across eternity and encompasses the entire universe, Mr. Toda would often say humorously: "We die, but we are reborn. For my part, 1 would like to come back as a stunning beauty!., He would then go on to joke that this beauty would be famous around the world, with people flocking to buy her photos and get her autograph. Of course, L-Mr.Toda,inspiredbythemajesticformhe said, she would never give her autograph to ofindomitableMountFuji,dauntlesslytookbador hatefulpeople. theleadforkosen-rufu until hisverylast moment. I firmly believe his noble life is an exampleto allof us of attaining Buddhahood The Lion's Roar of .entor and Disciple Uniteddent, also brought bouts of illness. When a Soka Gakkai leader once asked him why he was ill, Mr. Toda answered: "Mybeing sick like this represents a great 'leswting of karmic rctribution.7 Instead of the Soka Gakkai being destroyed, I got this illness.e"' He also once told someone: -when I die, I think I will return to Nidmm's side and stay there for about a wasor tm days. Given the fact that tinee. ow0.i1lvssplanets like the go 10 oaee<Clf:.6,a ..t 111111k a Jrose:n-rufu \fliliai ¥¥¥cf t 1J111t1ataimtructed.¥ de .. cffl I alle of Jifie he pos.--.-.e-¥ 11,.,._. to arry out _. a1em,e, ..... ,........aametmc immense ---iifeaiahe¥lllallf.¥pwilk T.o mme1 i¥1Le41i.wt padion f/l;6,: ffllighteu.mtilt bee!iiidep,ial. -oitaá 1MJ1,t -that the1ife..state of.,.,...._---ahtohrte bappinaE'WnohJte.-¥¥¥eto .eaÇme ofimp,cllible ;a, iaoada life every.-inonitlifeatada ---Further. by strag1ing for lmlm-mfu to the very end; we can l1M>r IUchan apamivc state ofbeiiig during our final days. Mr. Toda taught that this is proof of attaining Buddbahood in this lifetime-proof of having euterecl the path of eternal happiness. 60 Without a challenging or fighting spirit,we cannot attain Buddhahood. Through that sort of spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be expressed in various other ways, such as: the spirit of "true cause," of always starting from now; the resolve to never regress in faith; the heart of a lion king; the refusal to be defeated; faith that grows stronger day by day. Thus Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, chanted with this spirit, is none other than the source of infinite advance. No painful difficulty or karma is an obstacle for the daimoku of lion kings. Nam.myoho-renge-kyo has the power to turn adversity into a springboard for growth, to change karma into mission, to transform even sorrow into a wdlspring of creativity. Nichiren Daishonin's very life pulses in Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Thedaimoku of Soka Gakkai members struggling for kosen-rufu is the same as the daimoku chanted by our first and second presidents, Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda, to achieve the great desire of the happiness of all humankind. If we forget this fighting daimoku of courageous lion kings, our chanting will deviate from that of our mentors. In that case, our chanting will not produce the sound of the we have endured from the beginningless past and establish the eternal state of Buddhahood. Bychallenging ourselves with all our hearts so as to have no regrets in this lifetime, we can forge a state of Hfe victorious and free of regret throughout eternity. !know the wonder of supreme happiness and the bn1liant victory ofa great life. I composed this poem at the start of 2006 with the wish that all SGI members will lead tremendously fulfilling lives. May each of you make your way triumphantly along the path of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, enjoy.ing this "supreme happiness"and the "brilliant victory of a great life." Let us resolutely win in the struggle to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, which con.denses eternity into this present moment, and let us joyfully continue our journey of kosen.rufu together across eternity.0 S, Six difficult and nine CIL>)' IKU: Theo. ,:owcr¥ chapter 0f .1. Bodhisattvas of the Earth: Disciples of Shaltyamuni &om the remote past whom he calls forth in the ¥Emerging &om the Earth¥ chapter .r Lotus Sutn cxplaim from six pcnpcctaws the difficulty . pracnong the Lotus Sutra and entrusts with propagating the Lotus Sutra after bu the Lotus Suu-a after Shakyamuni's passing. By .tnsi. II de,cribes passing. They are known as Bodhisattvas o. the . tor they appear ¥ ¥ gly ¥ po,wble a..'l:ioos. such as throwing Mount Swncru into.-. i&IIU<UQ ': ....,....._ .ua>mpantivdyoQSJI (stt LSOC 213-1o-,-9).á from the earth Their leader is called Superior Practices. wor _2. Transfer of the essence of the Lotus Sutra; . the ¥Supernal. Powers" chapter or the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuru entrusts theosutr.u _teaching to Bodhisattva Superior Practices and the other. .ageIC a ptnOn who sp.-b the l.o(ua Sutra ID penecu ., ¥ ,_ bis Annocatio,u"" "TJw Wc>nls and PlirruaShaky.unUIU S pa,wng. U&of the Earth. This is called the "transfer of the n5oence .use L-t¥ ¥Shakyamuni describes the autra u wntaining: 1) "all . doctnncs (0 possessed by the Thus Come One"; 2) "all the &ttly cx,:rc45.:tJ'7{.natural powers of the Thus Come On."i J) .stothoW:C 0.aecret essentials of the Thus Come One ; and 4) all e.¥.;nuw1 7omauen or the Thus Come One¥ ..,u;_ft that ¥a11 thac arc r--.,._;.. ¥ (LSOC. Jl6) ¥ the ctre.! of biW brma from the past to ¥ lcsscr degrtt bÇausc of Buddhist faith and ra.:tice.¥ of the ! Th' boáL lice.,. prK:arher Nam-myoho-rcnF-kyo eoc:ompaMC,1 ::.f.nd t.e ,..aching ofothen" ("On theReceivingofthe ThrN ,or one Grc.at Secret Law,. WND-.2, 9'16). \ ltial &ca.:hin& (Nun¥m,,oho-rcngc-kyo) bu (which IDCIUII . , IS we the IICIM:hcr. ¥""" onuuu .,.. 4. The daimo.i::f J..=. of C.ith and the daimok1& of pr11etice. Tb.t 1wo a¥pc"s: ¥ bcliew in the Gohonron.the latlef to dwia Nam-formÇ nicans 10 ¥ ¥ __ ,. by the duciplcs. The 'roar' [or the term 'lions¥ roar'J ¥ ISIS m:c1.radoat.' ¥ "(OTT, 111) IOl&l1d of the INCha and the disciples chanting In WUSOII ¥ ¥ Faith Dedicated to Kosen-rufu The Path of Chanting Is the Natural Way To The actual practice of daimoku of the Bodhi.Achieve Enlightenment sattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of the Law means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for theThe path of chanting Nam-myoho-rcnge-l--yo is, enlightenment of all people-a practice aiming in a sense, the most natural way for human beings for the happiness of both oneself and others. As to achieve enlightenment. This is because it is the Nichlren indicates when he says "At first only means for us to reveal the "'mystic truth that is Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but originally inherent" in our lives (see WND-1, 3). then two, three, and a hundred followed;' the Nichircn emphasizes the very natural way in essence of this practice is chanting it ourselves which chanting Nam-myoho-rcnge-kyo allows us and also teaching it to others ("The True Aspect to manifest this innate mystic truth. (pp. 54-55) of All Phenomena," WND-1, 385). The Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted by the Strong Faith ls Re.quired Bodhisattvas of the Earth is characterized by To Attain Buddhahood deep, thoroughly forged faith to overcome dark.In This Ufetime ness and devilish functions, and by practice for both ourselves and others. Its essence, in short, is The kind of mda neec1ec1 for attainingBuddha.faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. (pp. 57-58}hood ine.tlm tifdimeeamla dms be described a faith dlate.,.. am -cJeq,u. Such faith is Opening the Life-State of Buddhahood .jlrieeMmewt#Jlc+iean-ueof thc Earth. N'din:PPfitl\!ri1t---. "'1'bae boctbisat;tvas A fighting faith through which we take on and are theo,11rJ w1le W 6omuahlJJi:qed their overcome the three obstacles and four devils opens .---othere._.., 6q poge-4 "'thor.the life-state of Buddhahood. There is no attaining oujhly foiged faith¥ (T..a,enJ Stone lager: enlightenment without struggling against the three WNIJ..t,e953). powerful enemies. Those who work unceasingly :Atthe aidof--0. AUa,inm.g Baddbabood in for kosen-rufu are genuine Buddhas. (p. 58} Thuerifctlme,¥\Nimimi-.6e6,Dowjngepu... &omethe-&1peaJ1t11r4ePowcne(tltheThus Attaining Buddhahood Come e>ne-.ecdlelAIIIIIIeSma:¥Afta I With a Challenging Spirit havepauediJWi . [oae] tbould.accept and uphold this 111tra. Sada a pmo11 ....-edly Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we can.and without doubt .wi11 attain die 8wlc1ha not attain Buddhahood. Through that sort of way" (LSOC; 318). He . this II Kripture1 spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood evidence of pining enJightenmeat through becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of chaliting the tlaimob, (or title] of tbe Lotus our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be Sutra,Myoho-R11ge-kyo. We can rad this pas.expressed in various other ways, such as: the sage to mean that the thoroughly forged faith of spirit of"true cause," of always starting from now; the Bodhisattva of the Barth ia precisely the the resolve tonever regress in faith; the heart of a faith required for attaining Buddbabood in this lion king; the refusal to be defeated; faith that lifetime. (p. 56) grows stronger day by day. (p. 60) In dex A action, Buddhist wisdom into, 12; taking, 43, 51 attitude, 29, 32, 34, 41 B hodhisattvas, 39 Bodhisattvas of the Earth, 56; practice of the, 57-58 Buddha(s), 13, 31, SO, 58; and ordinary people, 4, 22, 24, 38-39; Bodhisattva Superior Practices and, 56 Buddhahood, 2-9, 13-14, 17-18, 21-24, 29-34, 39, 41-43, 47, 49-51 , 54-6 1; scriptural evidence of attaining, 56. See also Myoho.renge-kyo; Nam-myoho.renge-kyo Buddhism, 13, 17, 22, 47 C cause and effect, 21, 48-49, 55 challenging spirit, 41 compassion, 43 courage, 34, 41, 43 D daimoku [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo], 56-57, 60-61 "Devadatta" chapter (Lotus Sutra), 4 difficulties, 34, 55 "The Difficulty of Sustaining Paith,È 41 E "Earthly Desires are Enlightenment," 42 "Emerging from the Earth" chapter (Lotus Sutra), 43 "The Entity of the Mystic Law," 14 "Expedient Means" chapter (Lotus Sutra), 40 F faith, 3, 5-7, 9, 20-22, 24-25, 30-34, 39-43, 49-51, 55--61; dedicated to kosen-rufu, 58 "The Farther the Source, the Longer the Stream," 42 fighting spirit, to battle our inner funda.mental darkness, 40, 59, 60 fundamental darkness, 8, 18, 20-21, 24, 29-32, 34, 39-42, 47,49, 51, 55-58 G "General Stone Tiger," 56 Gohonzon, 31 grave offenses, 30 H happiness, 2, 13, 21-22, 43 "Happiness in This \Vorld;> 21, 41 heart, importance of, 5, 6, 21, 29, 34, 38, 39, 47, 49. See also mind ho, 48 "How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus Sutra,È 23 On Attai ning 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime human existence, 11 humankind, 18; changing destiny of, 8-9, 17, 49. See also kosen-rufu inner,change,,5-6,,8,,29,,38-39,,49 K kosen-rufu, 33, 42, 51, 58-6L See also humankind L "Letter to N"iiket 24 "Letter to Rmjo,¥ 50 "Letter to the Brothas,¥ 50 ¥Life Span" mapkr(l.otus Sutra), 14 living tnlefO GINadf (Josei Toda), 25 Lotus SPlra, 13-14, 16-17, 22, 33, 38, 49-51,,:58 uThdotus Stma,llllts Openingand 20-24,,26,,29-34,,38-43,,47, 49-51. 54-55, 57; and fighting spirit, 60; mirror analogy, 6, 37-40, 42, 47. See also Buddha.hood; Myoho-renge-kyo Nan-Yueh, 57 negative functions, 55; defeating, 5 Nichikan,,14, 18,31,40 Nichiren Buddhism, 2-4, 7-9, 12, 14, 16-18,20,26,30-31,,33-34, 40-41,43,50-51,,57-59 Nichiren Daishonin, 2-4, 6-9, 11-15, M Mahayana BucJdlium, l3.,25 Makigucbi. Tsunesabum, 1.J3, 58,Q); OD Nicbirm Bndcthism, 43 Manjushri, 39 "The Meaning of the Sacred Teaching, of the Buddha's J.iferime,¥ 26 mentor-disciplerelationship, 33, 43, 51, 5.1 Midclle Day, practice ot S7 Middle Way, 48 mind(s), 5-8, 14, 16-17, 21, 29-30, 34, 38-39, 43, 47-51. Se.e also heart myo,47-49 6 4 Myoho-renge-kyo, 14-15, 17, 21, 23, 47, 49, 55. See also Buddhahood; mystic truth; Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 1.ystic Law, 6, 22-24, 29, 33-34, 39, 50, 56, 59. See also Myoho-renge-kyo; Nam-myoho-renge-kyo mystic truth, 6, 13-17, 21, 41, 47, 49, 55, 57; manifesting the, 4. See also Myoho-renge-kyo N Nagarjuna, 48 Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, 3, 11-12, 15-18, 17-18,,20-21,,23,,25-26,,28-30, 32,,34,37-42,46-49,,54-58, 60--61; admonition of, 24, 31, 50; and human beings, 5 Nirvana Sutra, 50 non¥Buddhist thinking, 29-31 0 "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mindt 21, 55, 57 "On Persecutions Befalling the Sage," 42 "On the Four Stages of Paith and the Five Stages of Practice,È 55 ordinary people, 4, 21-22, 24, 38, 48, 50, 54, 56 p "Persecution by Sword and Staff," 58 perseverance, 41-43 polishing our lives, by chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo, 39-42 pre-Lotus Sutra teachings> 4, 22-23, 48 present existence, 61 provisional teachings. Seepre-Lotus Sutra teachings Pushkin, Aleksandr, 18 R The Record of Orally Transmitted Teach.ings,29-30, 42-43 religion(s), 22, 25; purpose of, 11 renge,48-49 Ryokan, 51 s seeking the Law of Nam-myoho-renge.kyo, 6, 8, 25, 28-32 "The Selection of the Time:' 22 SGI, members of the, 3, 9, 33, 61 Shakyarnuni, 11, 13-14, 30, 48, SO, 56, 58, 61 Six Paramitas Sutra, 50 Six-Volume Writings (Nichikan), 31 slander, 32-33 Soka Gakkai, 31, 33, 59; members, 42, 59-60; and Nichiren's writings. 61 "The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra,È 21, 47 substituting faith for wisdom, 30-31, 35 sufferings of birth and death, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 13,28,37,38,39,61 ''Supernatural Powers" chapter (Lotus Sutra), 51, 56, 61 T "The Teaching, Practice and Proof; 34 "The Three Great Secret Laws," 57 three thousand realms in a single moment of life, 14, 15, J 8, 24 "The True Aspect of All Phenomena:' 7, 56, 58 T'ien-t'ai, 14, 16-17, 48, 57; Buddhism of, 30 Toda, Josei, 24, 33, 42, 51, 58; on Bud.dhahood, 59-60; on illness, 60; and the 1'1ystic Law, 25; "Soka Gakkai Buddha; 59; on the young women's division, 34; on youth, 43 Toki Jonin, 3 transmigration, 12-13 twenty-first century, transforming. 2 u unity, 33 V victory> 43 Vimalakirti, 39 Vimalak.irti Sutra. 38-39 wisdom>Buddhist, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 30> 32, 38, 43, 48 6 5 --, No.s ---===-==-=-=-=-=---. te. =-=-=-=-=-=-.--= Notes---------.......----------------.-1 1--------------------.----á-----------------.1 \____ ____ :\_ _ ___ ¥ '-------------.! 67 On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime KeyPoints: The Essence of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo The Law contained in the practice of chanting spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. But C\>cn the power of this wondrous Lawcannot fully manifest in -a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that prevents us from believing in the Mystic Law and sta}ing focused on our own Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of chanting enables us to break through this darkness and vibrantly bring forth om Buddhahood. Bat.tling our fundamental darkness-this inner struggle is theessenceof chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. (p. 29) The Heart of Buddhism If¥ seek mfigktm¥M"lll outsideofus, we are not punoiog the pill m .observing oneás mind," wbidltmatilamtoommmetbefundamental evil ti ipÇAM' Ç Giil¥M5S In that case, all our effimandgoocldcrdstoattam cnligbtenm.t will be Jacking the Yitai ingr,dic:nt; they will be every bit as fulile acmpntjn_g .a neighbor's vast riches. Moreover. because none of these efforts will help u, enctic:ate QIU' igaormc.e. they will only become ¥anendless. painfid alJltrritr,' This battle against igoo.is the barttoflluddbism (p. 30) The Orlving Fora for Our Transformation If we chant to the Gohom.on butalways blame otherpeople orourenvironmeat forourcircum.stanc:es, we areavoiding . challenge of tadding ourinnerdarkness orignorauc.e. By doing so, we areseeking enlightenment outside of us. By chang.ing ourselvesonamoreprofoundlevel thatwe can begin to improve our situation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is thedriving force for that change. (p. 31) Confident and Concrete Prayer The erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the Mystic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core an inability to believe that all people-our.selves and others-possess the Buddha nature. And this disbelief stems from fundamental dark.ness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to skeptically regard the Buddha nature as "a nice ideal but one that doesn't really change reality" will manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking in conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he says, "You must summon up deep faith" (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inher.ent Buddha nature the basis of our lives-or as Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime-we must continue striving to deepen our faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43) Overcoming Grumbling and Complaining Grumbling and complaining are the principal gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe.lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find ourselvesgrumbling and complaining in spite of ourselves.Should such behavior become habitual, itwill actasaconstant brake on our growth and causeusto forget about advancing and improving ourselves. We will then effectively close off our own potential,falling into the path of seeking the Law outsideof us. While it might be a real challenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these tendencies and use them as a springboard for pos.itive growth and development. (p. 32) [s} Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a"Brave and Vigorous" Spirit.Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas_,emancipation in the minds of ordinarybeings, one finds that ordinarybeings are the entities of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two land. pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of our minds. It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary .ing. When deluded, one is called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewd when polished. A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar.nished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo. ("011 Attainin. Bud<lh.ihuod in 1 his Lifecim.." á111,¥ \\'ri1i11i,-s of Ni.hitt:11 D.ii>h,mir. vol. I, p. -1) 37 On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime the great treasure storehouse that brings .xld fortune and happiness to all. The important thing is to live out our lives based on and completely in sync with the Law; it is to imbue and solidify our lives with the Mystic Law. Our daily realities are filled \\ith an endless succession of problems. But with the firm belief that our lives are Myoho-renge-l1¥0, we should strive to boldly challenge everything with the unwavering conviction that we can overcome all hardships and become happy without fail. \.\ "'hen we maintain deep faith based on the foundation that '"I am Myoho-renge--1.")'o,.,,we can take on any problem with courage. The key to victory in life lies in whether we can bring forth courage. Not a shrinking timidity but a challenging courage-.this is whatwe need to have! ht. ofthe obstacles we mayencounter in the course of om pnctice. we mllSt not retreat a single stq,. We mustnot be alarmed or startled by them.The power of die Mystic Law (Myoho..) amtri¥A.g,bama-mything. To become &eply.CiOllfideutaofdnsismostimportant. Fearin.gbardmipsaadbemoaoiogand rcsent.ingaouraammmnmtan:ato believe that theLaw is outsideour own ma.Soa¥ losing confidence in our ability toovmomc om ciu:umstaIK:es and turning to otben .in the hope that they will save us. or blaming othen for our pn>blems, or giving in to hopekssoess and rai,gnation. When diftiadtics be&et us.ano matter how try.ing they may be, we must dearly see them for the obstacles or devilish fnoctiom theyare and battle against them without retreating. This is the way oflife ofthose who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law. Nichiren Daishonin says, "[My] disciples cannot ac.complish anything if they are cowardly" ("The Teaching, Practice, and ProoC" WND-1, 481). In a.ord with these words, tees cast aside coWMlticc and make courage our foremost attribute. People of courageous faith can break through the dark clouds of fear, ignorance and delusion to bring the sun of the Mystic Law to shine and beautiful flowers of Myoho-renge-the lotus of the Mystic Law-to bloom in their lives. President Toda gave the following guidance to young women's division members in the pioneer.ing days of our movement: "You should take pride in possessing the same life as the Buddha of the Latter Day. Win in life with a noble spirit. You must absolutely never depreciate yourselves." Nichiren Buddhism starts from the realization that the supreme life-condition of Buddhahood exists in each of us. It is a teaching that makes it possible for us to achieve the profoundest inner transformation-a transformation of our funda.mental attitude or mind-set. That>s why Nichiren emphasizes the importance of our minds, of what's in our hearts. He writes: "Whether you chant the Buddha's name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots ofgoodness in your life. With this convic.tion you should strive in faith" (WND-1, 4). All our efforts in faith-including our practice of reciting the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo each morning and evening, as well as all of our various Soka Gakkai activities--are virtuous acts that "implant benefits and roots of goodness" in our lives. Those who advance with this deep aware.ness will be true victors who travel the direct path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Always upholding the great philosophy embodied in Nichiren's words "It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 1000), let us lead magnif.icent, victorious lives! 0 gstn,.t. her 3completed eugr5C' on Nichiren'J five '!11'¡' w.lln. .t.hes 10. The provisional teachings that prec . in .II people, andreach that the world of Bu.ha. eDSIJ ¥ r beings. Tbeinstead des<ribe Buddha, a, i(kiliud an<l .n th¥t uuread Pure Land (Nembutsu) teachings, for eumple,op. dqxnd on salvation through such a Ba.dy.Am;d.a. ifone chanu tht' daimoku while .S ..l..olll' Suua should thosc who lcÇp f.vrh who $lan.past, present and future existences. "The Buddhas of the ten direc.chanl Samá rendisciples and lay support. of :.; ,tbodr but one in mind. of U-.t' uJr,irn3te UW bond is rbe basas for the unr.-enal era -m-¥¥ of -.;id,.i,ts propag;t.chettruet/9"'" ¥ á _.b -¥ oe:s,rc for wick',prtáted. even t e gt¥.of life and dam. .Herem ricS _ ..-.... rd. ¥ . onlv Nichirm chanted :-;am-mvo':<>-9¥ Nichikan was the twenty-sixth chief priest of Taiseki-ji, the hea. -ic>-o. but thtn rwo. .tQdungot.l:erS. ProP.rh.. and a bundrcd foUo,.-ni: cha;":U:,l$wclL ()ocs this not iignify 'trr.erging from th<' crtb ¥ cla.ify their true meaning. During the four centuries after Nichiren 35 essence of which is escapism. ¥E\im. wbm.tlxyRa..._,sufttt._,peoplc of depmdmt mlh nlid locliaw. 1beir pmb,.lans. "Ibey clan'\ hne the CJCNIAle Ç mah any actual dbt Ir' dw .... 11am ......... In such cases..&mildJ.a&idlaashapja-Siilhidbiogpeo.P,C biat-brhiwJ ¥tber---..... with. W-dboat a m:cw}e. .CU.a_. .. ,¥¥ direcdy tion. In the same way, when we replace vague mpaeathepsa(aarJ. aetw+Ni-'11 lb asedaeamilagyder-¥ iwo-¥¥ ifwe just walk amuad 1be mlle .-JIIMI¥¥¥and yearnings with concrete determinations and con.fident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what we hope to achieve. Grumbling and complaining are the principal gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe.DeVa' actually.,.,,,. __ emcJ ......'JI .aad omsdves grumbling and complaining in spite of erro.neousabeliefabat.a(dle. tic Law) mats outside ofour Jives a at 8a'11:re an inability to bc1n tbatad . and others ro-¥the 811cWh, ...._And Cbil disbelief stems from fundaD1ffllal darJme-. In terms of attitude in faith, dus teadaacyto skeptically regard the Buddha nature ¥ ¥¥ tlice ftJ1ow ¥ ideal but one that doesn't really chaop rality" .lacking in conviction.Haour eff'orta in faith are halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the Law as existing outside one's own life tend to be authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and repress people. Theyare prone to emphasizing rit.uals or clerical authority, while their followers passively seek to assuage their anxieties through dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak.ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings' greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have come to function almost exclusively as purveyors of funeral and memorial sen-ices for the deceased. devolving into what is known as "funeral Bud.dhism." They offer no philosophy that empowers people or enables them to live better lives. The Soka Gakkai's founder, President Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a "teaching for transforming one's life." To believe that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo costs within us is to have the confidence that we will definitely become happy and attain BudJhahood in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working for kosen-rufu through shnring Nichiren Bud.dhism based on the conviction that it holds the The Spirit of the First Three Presidents Pulses in the Saka Gakkai A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of the Law in each person's life is one that treasures the individual. It calls out to each person, encour.ages his or her individual human revolution and key to happiness for both ourselves and others. This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and the SGI. The greatness of the oka Gakkai and the first three presidents' spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this most difficult of challenges-that of awakening people to the Law within. President Toda used to say, "You should resolve, 'I am Myoho-renge-1...-yo!"' The Mystic Law is the "highly effective medicine" (The Lotus S11trn a11d lts Ope11i11g a11d Closing S11tras, p. 269) nome ¥ move that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also 33 SGI President Ikeda's Lecture Series on Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime f birth of hope, even amid the greatesthardship or a ¥ ¥ ingilluminating the darkness of people's suffering, imparting inspiration, assurance and courage. When we change. the world changes. The key to all change is in our inner transforma.tion-a change in our beans and minds. This is human n=volution. We all have the power to change. When we reali7.e this truth of life, we can bring forth that power anywhere, anytime and in any situation. Here, Nichiren explains that Buddhas and ordinary people are not separated by an insur.mountable divide; that the only thing setting them apart is the difference in the "minds of id:rirm Buddbism, based on the transfor.mat:Ne principles of the Lotus Sutra, hasmade this great path of inner change available to all people. with the chanting of Nam-myoho.ordinary beings." Nichiren also cites the passage from therenge-kyou its COJe practice.This time. rn disa.m the passage in which Vimalakirti Sutra that explains the difference which Nichiren summarizes as "If the minds of N"acbircn Daishonin n11tlines the basic attitude and approach to our fundaromtal practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Changing Ourselves and Changing the Land As I have already touched on at length. the entirety of Budcfbisrn exists within our own lives. And the key ID attaining Buddhahood-the ultimate transformation of our life-state--alsolies in a change in our hearts. or mindi. To convey this point. Nichiren Daishonin here swnmarizes a point from the Vunalakirti Sutra:1 ..When one seeks the Buddhas¥ emanci.pation in the minds of ordinary beings, one È 38 or fifth, chapter. This chapter describes the exchange between Vimalakirtj, an outstanding Buddhist lay believer and practitioner of the bodhisattva way who has fallen ill, and Manju.shri, one of Shakyamuni's leading disciples, who is visiting him. When asked the cause of his illness, Vimalakfrti replies, "Because all living beings are sick, therefore I am sick."¥ This is a well-known passage that succinctly reveals the fundamental bodhisattva spirit of taking on others' sufferings as one's own. Vimalakirti goes on to say that bodhisattvas choose to be born among living beings afflicted by delusion and to share in the sufferings of birth and death in order to instruct and guide those living beings to enlightenment. More.over, bodhisattvas are never overwhelmed or swayed by suffering, because they have estab.lished a pure state of enlightenment within.5 Thus, the passages from the Vimalakirti Sutra cited by Nichiren clarify the meaning of Buddhahood and the pure land from the stand.point of a bodhisattva practitioner fighting amid the realities of daily life. Nichiren, there.fore, states in conclusion, "When deluded, one is called an ordinary being, but when enlight.ened, one is called a Buddha" (WND-1, 4). In other words, the difference between ordinary people and Buddhas is nothing more than the difference between delusion and enlightenment in ordinary people's minds. How, then, can we transform delusion into enlightenment? In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains that when people's hearts change, the land or their external environment can also change. At its foundation is a transformation from delu.sion to enlightenment. As discussed earlier, what makes this trans.formation possible is the practice of chanting Narn-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood with which we are originally endowed. Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe this fundamental potential for change, saying, "This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished" (WNO-I, 4). In this way, he conveys that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo--the means for defeating our inner darkness--serves to "polish" our lives. All living beings are inherently entities of the Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud.dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin.drance, whenever and in whatever form it is needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a benighted state, we are like a "tarnished mirror" that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the tarnished mirror of our lives. The Path for Polishing Our Lives: ( 1) Brave Challenge Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chant.ing as a practice for polishing our lives: "A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate dark.ness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a dear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena (i.e.¥ the Dharma nature] and the true aspect of 