Daisaku Ikeda 
' . 
Jf • 
. . 
. 
' . . 
• I . •. 
•1 
t 
.' 
, . ' 
r 
•I'•. 
I 
• '• 
. 
-' ' 
. . . .. 
• • ◄ :_ -. t .;/. :-_-{ 

Published by 
World Tribune Press 
606 Wilshire Blvd. 
Santa Monica, CA 90401 
C2011 by the Soka Gakkai • All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 
Design by Lightbourne, Inc. 
ISBN 978-1-935523-21-5 
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 
ti

Contents 
iv 
Editor's Note 
1 
"Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime-The 
Fundamental Purpose of Life and a Source of 
Hope for Humankind" (1} 
11 
"The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo-Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through 
Correct Buddhist Practice" (2) 
20 
'"If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, You Are 
Not Embracing the Mystic Law'" (3) 
28 
"Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude-Refusing 
To Live an 'Endless, Painful Austerity'" (4) 
37 
"Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a 'Brave and 
Vigorous' Spirit-Polishing Our Lives Through Daily 
Challenge" (S} 
46 
"The Mystic Nature of Our Lives-'Become the 
Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind 
Master You"' (6) 
54 
"Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime-
Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the 
Oneness of Mentor and Disciple" (7) 
64 
Index 
iii 

iv 
Editor's Note 
This series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda w as published in 
SGI-USA's Living Buddhism from the September- October 2006 
issue through the March-April 2007 issue. 
Please also see The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, pp. 3- 5, for 
"On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime." 
• GZ, page number(s}--refers to the Gosha zenshu. the Japaneselanguage compilation of letters, treatises, essays and oral 
teachings of Nichiren Daishonin. 
• LSOC, page number(s}--refers to The Lotus Sutra and Its 
Opening and Closing Sutras, translated by Burton Watson 
(Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2009). 
• OTT, page number(s}--refers to The Record of the Orally 
Transmitted Teachings, translated by Burton Watson (Soka 
Gakkai: Tokyo, 2004). 
• WNO, page number(s}--refers to The Writings of Nichiren 
Daishonin, vol. 1 (WND-1 ) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 1999) and 
vol. 2 (WND-2) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2006). 

SGI President lkeda•s Lecture Series 
This is a series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on the writing "011 Attaining 
Buddhahood in This lifetime." He writes, "Nichiren Daishonin:'- profou7ld teaching 
of attaini-g B11ddhahood irl this lifetime cm, powerfully tran-fom1 the age and 
open a bright future for our modem world in the twenty-first century." 
; . 

on Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
[1) 
Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime-
The Fundamental Purpose of Life and 
a Source of Hope for Humankind 
If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life. r0a AtlaiaiaglacMbeboocl in This Lifetime,• The Writings of Nichiren Daislio11in, vol. I, p. 3) 
Just what coostibrtes a cleeply rntaningful life? 
What is true bappinew. Nx:hirm lluddbivn 
is a ttaching of hope that enabla 11& to forge 
a state of UDS1l1'pused and indestructible happiness and to lead a life of supreme value. while 
also helping others do the wne. 
All people have the potential to attain 
Buddhahood; moreover, they can gain that lofty 
state just as they are and in fact are asiured 
of being able to do so in this lifetime. Nichiren 
Buddhism dearly elucidates this wonderful path 
to cnlightenmenL 
Nichiren Daishonin's profound teaching of 
2 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime was a 
revolutionary concept that turned prevailing 
Buddhist thought on its head. Indeed, it continues to shine today as a principle that can 
powerfully transform the age and open a bright 
future for our modern world in the twenty-first 
century. 
Therefore, Ilook forward to studying 
Nichiren's writing "On Attaining Buddhahood in 
This Lifetime" together with you, as we embark in 
high spirits on a new journey of growth and 
development toward the Soka Gakkai's eightieth 
anniversary (in 2010). 

The Profound Meaning of 
Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
"On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime" is 
an important writing that clarifies the basic 
theory and practice of Nichiren Buddhism. SGI 
members throughout the globe have deepened 
their understanding of the essence of Nichiren 
Daishonin's teachings by earnestly studying this 
writing as a guideline for practice and study. 
Although the original is no longer extant and 
the precise date and name of the recipient are 
unknown, this letter is traditionally thought to 
have been written around 1255 and addressed to 
Toki Jonin.1 The assertion that it was composed 
in 1255, shortly after Nichiren publicly declared 
his teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in 1253, is 
credible in view of the letter's content, explaining 
as it does the significance of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in terms of both theory and 
practice. 
The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo is the foundation of Nichiren's lifetime of 
teachings. Nichiren Buddhism, unlike the established Buddhist schools of his day, was not 
dedicated to the worship of a specific god or Buddha. Nichiren established the means for all people 
to achieve enlightenment, the ideal of the Lotus 
Sutra, by formulating the practice of chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which enables us to activate our inherent Buddha nature and manifest it 
as the life-state of Buddhahood. 
In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has two aspects: the chanting 
of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and 
chanting in terms of practice. Chanting in terms 
of faith refers to the spiritual aspect of our practice. This essentially consists of the struggle we 
wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or 
darkness-a battle against the negative and 
destructive forces within us. lt means that 
through the power of faith-in other words, 
through strengthening our conviction that we 
possess the Buddha nature- we can break 
through the darkness obscuring this awareness, 
thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood. 
Chanting in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers 
to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves 
and also teaching it to others. It means making 
efforts in word and deed for our own and others' 
happiness in the course of our spiritual struggle 
against inner negativity and illusion. 
When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we 
are both chanting the name of, and calling forth, 
the Buddha nature in our own lives and the lives 
of others. Through applying our practice of faith 
to win over doubt and delusion, the power of our 
inherent Buddha nature is called forth by the 
sound of our chanting and spontaneously manifests in our lives. 2 
The key point that sets Nichiren Buddhism 
apart from the other Buddhist schools of bis day 
was the establishment of this concrete means 
for attaining Buddhahood. And from the time he 
first declared Nam-myoho-renge-kyo until the 
moment of his death, Nichiren ardently strove to 
teach this supreme path of enlightenment to people throughout the land. 
In the opening passage of"On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," Nichiren clearly and 
fully articulates the basic philosophy of enlightenment that lies at the heart of his teaching, 
which exists for the happiness of all humanity: "If 
you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of 
birth and death you have endured since time 
without beginning and to attain without fail 
unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you 
must perceive the mystic truth that is originally 
3 

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
___ .::.:.:...:..:::=.:.::..::.:.:=---------- ------(
inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myohorenge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will 
therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth 
innate in all life" (WND-1, 3). 
\Ve'll discuss the profound meaning of this 
passage in detail next time. But briefly, it says that 
by manifesting within us the mystic truth inherent in all living beings, we can free ourselves from 
the endless sufferings of birth and death. The 
name of that mystic truth is Myoho-renge-kyo, 
and the way to manifest it is through chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
The Significance of Our Existence as Human Beings 
Nevertheless, even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you 
think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but 
an inferior teaching. /\IWD-1, 3! 
The concept of attaining Buddhahood in 
this lifetime refers to ordinary people 
becoming enlightened during the course 
of their present existences. By extension, it means 
that they can achieve this just as they are. As such, 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime means 
the same thing as attaining Buddhahood in one's 
present form, which is the Lotus Sutra's approach 
to Buddhahood and illustrated by the example 
of the dragon king's daughter3 in the sutra's 
"Devadatta" chapter. 
This view contrasts sharply with the pre-
Lotus Sutra teachings, which expound that one 
can become enlightened only after practicing 
austerities over countless lifetimes. Because the 
4 
life-state of Buddhahood is at one with the eternal Mystic Law and abounds with infinite wisdom 
and compassion, it tended to be seen as something completely separate and removed from the 
lives of ordinary people steeped in illusion. 
Attaining enlightenment was thought to require 
overcoming the unfathomably deep chasm 
between the spiritual states of a Buddha and ordinary people, and this gave rise to the idea that it 
was necessary to carry out austere practices for 
innumerable kalpas.◄ 
Nichiren Buddhism clarifies that it is specifically in this present existence, in which we have 
been born as human beings, that we can actualize 
the principle of attaining Buddhahood in one's 

present form as explained in the Lotus Sutra. And 
Nichiren Daishonin reveals how to actualize this 
profound teaching. 
Drawing an analogy to rice crops, Nichiren 
notes that while some ripen early and some ripen 
late, they will all mature and be ready for harvest 
within the year. He explains that votaries of the 
Lotus Sutra will likewise attain Buddhahood in 
this existence without fail.s 
Nichiren places importance on the present 
lifetime of human beings. Of course, not only 
humans but also all living beings possess the 
Buddha nature and have the potential to attain 
Buddhahood in their present form, but Nichiren's 
focus is always first and foremost on the happiness of human beings. 
The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted 
and rich; it has the capacity for magnificent 
achievement. For that very reason, the heart often 
undergoes great suffering and torment, and can 
become trapped in an endless, downward spiral. 
SGI President Ikeda 
at Saka University, 
Hachioji, Tokyo, 
on May S, 2006. 
Will we transmigrate forever along the paths of 
evil, or can we succeed in directing our lives into 
an orbit of good? 
As evidenced in many of his writings, 
Nichiren repeatedly stresses the crucial importance of the heart, or mind. In this inner realm of 
life, the potential resides for dramatic shifts from 
evil to good or from good to evil. That is why 
Nicbiren's teaching of enlightenment can be 
viewed as a process that begins with inner change. 
In other words, through the power of faith, we 
can defeat the negative functions inside us that 
are governed by the fundamental darkness in all 
human hearts and manifest the positive functions 
of life that are one with the Dharma nature-our 
Buddhahood. 
This present lifetime, in which we have been 
born as human beings, represents a golden 
opportunity to ensure that our lives no longer 
transmigrate along the evil paths but instead 
traverse the paths of good. 
5 

On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
Emphasis on Inner Change 
- 
when you chant myolaoand recite rmge, you must summon up deep 
faith that M}'obo-rmge-l'yo is -your life itself. (WND-l, 3) 
Al'OU9C -., faith, ad diligently polish -your mirror day and night. How 
sboa1d JOll po1is1a ii! Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (WND-1, 4) 
I
D "On Anaining Buddbahcwf Ul This life.. 
timc,•Nidmm Daisbmrin 1bomugb1y aplains 
tbatwe annotadin mJightt,111<Dl without 
a profound dJange in om lifts, in our bm1S and 
minds. 
Fmt, be writes that the mystictmdi with which 
all liYing bcinp are mdawm teals "'1be principle 
of the JDUIDally indusiw matioosbip of a single 
moment of life and aD phmorneoa• (WNO. I, 3). 
What this means is that om 1Ms or our minds at 
acb IDODlmt both embody all pbenomcna and 
pervade all phmomma This a,u1d be de$aibed as 
a life.state of ODCDCSS with the univme. 
Also,Nlchirm warns tbat if we seek the Mystic 
Law outside ounclves, tben DO matto' bow much 
we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we cannot 
manifest the condition of eolightenment; on the 
contrary, our Buddhist practic.e will ouly "become 
an endless. painful austerity" (WND-1, 4). He 
clearly states: "Even though you chant and believe 
in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic 
Law but an inferior teaching' (WND-1, 3). 
6 
Nichirtn explains that the key to chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is summoning up deep 
wth, or confidence, in the existence of our innate 
Buddbahood. He declares that when we do so, we 
can polish our lives and reveal our enlightenment, 
writing: "Therefore, when you chant myoho and 
rmte renge [that is, chant Nam-myoho-rengekyo], you must summon up deep faith that 
Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself [literally, 
your mind at each moment]" (WND-1, 3). He 
continues: "Arouse deep faith, and diligently 
polish your mirror day and night. How should you 
polish itl Only by chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo• (WNO-I, 4). 
In addition, Nichiren speaks of "the mystic 
entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate 
reality" (WND-1, 4)-in other words, the mystic, 
inscrutable nature of life, of our hearts and 
minds, that manifests as Buddhahood. Here, he 
indkates that Myoho-renge-kyo is the wonderful 
law of life, of the inner realm of our beings. 
On that basis, he asserts that when we chant 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in the 

Mystic Law, we can reveal our Buddhahood in this 
lifetime. Nichiren writes: "The Lotus Sutra is the 
king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for 
it explains that the entity of our life [literally, out 
mind or inner reality], which manifests either good 
or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the 
Mystic Law. If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with 
deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain 
Buddhahood in this lifetime" (WNO-I, 4). 
A Teaching of Genuine Humanism 
Next, I'll touch on the significance of Nichiren 
Daishonin's teaching of attaining Buddhahood in 
this lifetime from three perspectives. 
I'll start by pointing out that through opening 
the way for all people to attain Buddhahood in 
this lifetime through chanting Nam-myohorenge-lcyo, Nichiren established for the first time 
a teaching of genuine humanism. Opening the 
way to enlightenment for all people could be 
called the prerequisite for a genuinely humanistic 
religion. This, Ibelieve, is the religious or philosophical significance of the principle of attaining 
Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
Nichiren had deep insight into the potential 
of human beings, discerning that they could free 
themselves from a cycle of negative transmigration and realize a positive one through profound 
inner change. And he set forth a practical way to 
enable all people to achieve this. Consequently, 
there is no other teaching that can more 
deservedly be called humanistic than Nichiren 
Buddhism. 
In "The True Aspect of All Phenomena," 
Nichiren writes: "Though it is thought that 
Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the three virtues 
of sovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake 
of all of us living beings, that is not so. On the 
contrary, it is common mortals who endow him 
with the three virtues" (WND- 1, 384). This passage describes a shift from an authoritarian to a 
humanistic, people-centered religion.' The 
teaching of Nichiren, who established the concrete means for achieving enlightenment in this 
lifetime, makes this shift possible. 
When the Soka Gakkai's first president, 
Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, formulated his theory of 
value, he did not include the aspects of "holiness" 
or "sacredness," which many thinkers before him 
had considered to constitute religious value. For 
Mr. Makiguchi, "great good" was deemed the highest value a religion should strive to realize. By"great 
good," he is referring to the highest value that can 
be actualized by human beings and society. In 
Mr. Makiguchi's theory of value, we find the view 
that a true religion is one that serves the welfare of 
human beings. Nich.iren's opening of the path to 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime signifies 
the establishment of a religion that contributes 
to the happiness of human beings in the greatest 
possible way. 
The Significance of Attaining 
Buddhahood for Our Lives 
Second, by opening the path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, Nichiren Daishonin made it 
possible for us to lead lives based on the infinite 
power of the Mystic law-that is, to lead solid 
and secure lives that give us the courage and confidence to be self-reliant. This is the significance 
of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this 
lifetime in terms of our individual lives. 
In Nichiren Buddhism, attaining enlightenment 
is not about embarking on some inconceivably long 
7 

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
journey to become a m.-plen&nt, godlike Buddha, 
it is about a\.-complishing a transforrnation in the 
depths of one's being. This rc\'olutionary view 
of enlightenment fundamentally <:hanged the 
meaning of Buddhist prac&--e from bow it was 
traditionally ,icwed. 
ln other words, it is not a matter of practidng in 
order to scak the higho1 summit of enlightenment 
at some point in the distant future. Rather, it is 
a ronswn. moment-to-moment. inner struggle 
-un 1"\-caling our innate Dharma nature or 
all°"ing oursel\-es to be ruled b)• our fundamental 
darknes'Sand delusion. This onaasing _..1fort to polish our liws is the- of Rnddb!st practice. 
Only by winning over our inner dnrkncss 
and l\cgativity can we be victorious in life and 
reveal our full potential. The same is true if we 
wish to savor true fulfillment. Allow me to 
emphasize, then, that the Nichiren Buddhist 
practice toward attaining Buddhahood in this 
lifetime is the only means to conquer the darkness and delusion that are the fundamental 
source of human evil, and cultivate true independence. It allows us to construct a solid self, 
and achieve a state of life of boundless happiness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood 
in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental 
purpose of an individual's life. 
----.. -• 
•-
_,., 
-• ..,..... • ._ 
..,.a,••• 
._. 
•-,,.... 
0:, ,.,.--,.,...,---• 
-
-
llining Buddhahood for Humanity 
The Lotus Satn. is the king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it 
npl•iu& that the entity of our life, which manifests either good or evil at each 
rnornent, is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law. 
If you chant Myoho-raige-kyo with deep faith in this principle, you are 
mtain to attain Boddhabood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states, 
*Aftalhavepmedintoextinction,[one] should accept and uphold this sutra. 
Such• person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way." Never 
doubt in iM slightest. (WND-1, 41 
Third. the principle of attaining Buddhahood 
in this lifetime is signi6cant in that it offers 
a 50lll'ce of hope to humanity and opens the 
way to transforming the destiny of all bunwikind. 
This is its collective or universal significance. 
tta1m has been neglected and all too many people 
are obsessed with seeking comfort, ease and pleasure 
in external things-things outside of themselves. 
Without surmounting the fundamental human 
delusions of greed, anger and foolishness, we cannot solve the many problems that the world faces 
today, including the preoccupation with economic 
growth, politics that are devoid of humanism, 
international conflicts, warfare, growing disparity 
Many leading thinkm and intellectuals recog• 
niz.e that modem civiliution has lost sight of the 
human being and become deadlocked on many 
fronts. There is no denying that the inner spiritual 
8 

between rich and poor, and rampant discrimination. One conclusion from my dialogues with 
leading thinkers is that the only real solution is for 
human beings themselves to change, that the sole 
key lies in human revolution. 
It could further be said that without establishing a correct view of life and death, it is 
impossible to conquer inner darkness and delusion at the most fundamental level. Without the 
Middle Way view of life and death-a view that 
rejects the extremes of the doctrine of annihilation and the doctrine of eternity7-
true and 
lasting happiness cannot be achieved. 
The only way for human beings to change is 
for them to conquer their inner darkness and 
rediscover the eternal dignity within their own 
lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all 
people are originally endowed will directly lead to 
a change in the destiny of humankind. With that 
conviction, we of the SGI have been working to 
build a network of good all around the globe. 
In the course of these lectures, Iwill comment 
further on the growing expectations and praise for 
this w1precedented endeavor we are undertaking. 
At the end of "On Attaining Buddhahood in 
This Lifetime," Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Never 
doubt in the slightest" (WND-1, 4). He is telling 
I. Toki Jonin: Alay follower of Nichiren Daishonin. He lived in Wakamiya, 
Kiusushika District of Shimosa Province (part of present-day Chib.l Prefoc• 
lure) and served as a retainer to Lord Chiba. tic Wil.i the re.-ipient of Ill.lily 
of Nichiren's writings, incluJing "The Object of Devotion for Observing 
the Mind," and cart'fully pre,erv..Jthem. 
2. In "Ilow Those lniti.tlly A>piring to the Way Can Att:lin BuJJ.h.lhood 
through the lotus Sutr,1," Nichiren writes: "',\'hen we revere Myoho-reng,... 
kyo inherent in our own life as the obje.-t of devotion, the BuJJha nature 
-.i1hin us is summoned forth and m.uiifested by our chanting of N= • 
myohu-renge-kyo. This is what is meant by 'Buddha.' To illustr.1te, when a 
c.iged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky arc thereby summoned 
and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gatha .iround, the 
bird in the cage strh·cs to get ouL When with our mouths we ch.lot the 
My•tic Law, our BudJ!u nature, being summoned, will im-ariably e1ncf)le" 
(WND-1, 887), 
3. In "L>.:vadatt•,• thee twdfth chapta of the l otw Suua, the eight-)C.1t•old 
daughter of the dragon king SJg•ra con, d,es the desire for e11lightenme11t 
,,hen •he hl'.lrs Bodhisattva Zllanju..hri preach the LotuS S111ra. Sh< comes 
to offm .1 jc1,•d to ShJkyamunl and in,t.lllt.1I1<0u.sly pcrfocts the bwhisattvu J>r.ictic-. She then .ipp<ars in a lanJ to the south call.,J Spotlos 
World an,I 111Jnif.e,ts the stat• of lluJdhahood without ch.11111ing her 
us that we should have complete confidence in 
the reveaJing of our Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
His words also contain the warning that unless we 
maintain this strong confidence, or faith, we can 
easiJy lose sight of the fundamental goal of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime and fall into the 
depths of darkness and delusion. 
All people at the core of their lives yearn to 
attain enlightenment. But there is no teaching 
more difficult to believe or understand than the 
teaching that we can definitely manifest the state 
of Buddhahood in our present existence. We of 
the SCI have taken on the challenge of practicing 
this profound teaching and sharing it widely with 
others around the globe. 
In today's world, we- the courageous Bodhisattvas of the Earth, are showing great actual 
proof of humankind's potential to transform 
its destiny. Proud of our noble mission, let us 
continue to joyously spread Nichiren Buddhismwith its teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this 
lifetime that enables all people to achieve unsurpassed happiness-and lead the most valuable 
and fulfilling lives possible. 
dragon form ;u,d preaches the, Lotus Sutra to all livuig bcms, tb,rc (stt 
Tho, Lotus Surra .md ra Opc,uni cutd Ctow,g SMlnll. pp. -6-23). 
-l In ancient lnJi.ln co.,roology, an =
- 
long period of lime. 
5. In his writtng "'Th< Do<:trine of Ton,e Ttwu=J Realms in a Single 
Moment of life,• Nichiren sures; •If,- of the Lo!U.1 Sum carry out 
rtligious pra.:tice a:. the sum - 
then CY'tT( one of them without 
C.lCq>lion will ,- ly .main 811ddhaho.>J 'Withln hi$ or her prcsocnt lifetime. 
To cicc <lll an.uog_v. if one pbnu the fidds in spring and summa, then, 
wh,eth<r it be ouly or late, ooe LS cctUin to n,ap a b.&tvdt within the year. 
Votaries of the Lotus Sucrol f:lll 1nro thttt ca1,gorics. sup,:rior, middling. 
infonor, J,l"'nJing upon th<ir ar.:ibo. and yet all will invariably attain 
enlightenment within a single litetimc" (W-D-2. 88). 
6. For SGI Prt:SiJcnt lk-'s Jet:ailcJ di:icu»ion of this pusage, stt the 
--.:moo 20().I Livu,g BuJJlus"" p. :?5. 
7. Th.e do.:trinc of mnihilicion is the mislllU11 anadunfflt to the notion that 
hfc b<giru with birth and enJs with <lath. According 10 this view, there is 
only th, pm.:nt life, .u,d d-,,.ith rcpr.:s.:nu a compktc ccss.ition of existence 
both ph)-si,.al lllJJ •piritual The doctrine of ccernity is also the mutakm 
notion ch.it "h•c exists here in the pn:>cnt is permanent and unchanging. 
Tbts -iew n:jc..-ts ausality, .so that neither practicing good nor practicing 
evil proJuca; any chJ11gc in one's conJition. 
9 

1-1 
On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
Key Points 
Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
in Terms of Faith and Practice 
ln Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam-myohorenge-l")'Ohas two ---ts: the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-l.1,0 in terms of faith and chanting in 
terms of practice. Chanting in terms of faith rckrs 
to the spiritual aspc,a of our practke. This essentially consis1s of the struggle we wage in our hearts 
against our inner delusion or darkness--a battle 
against the ncgaliwe and destructive forces within 
us. It llltmS that through the power of faith-in 
other words, 1hrougb Sba1gtbening our oonviaion 
that we possess the Buddha wtu:c we can break 
through the .darbess obscuring this awareness, 
thus malingthelife-SlmofBuddhahood. Onnting in 1erm$ of - 
meanwhile, refers to 
dwniDg Nam-myoho-imge-kyo ourselves and 
•tracbingittoothm.h!Dela rnaking--.fforts in 
word and deed tor om own and others" happiness 
in the a>mse of om spiritual sttagg1e against inner 
Dtptivity .nil i1lnsioo, (p. 3) 
The Heart Is Most Important 
The human heart is- 
rnubifaceted 'll1d rich; 
it bas the capacity for magnifia:nt - 
For 
that vr:ry mlSOD, 1he heart oftm undergoes great 
suffrriog and torment. and CID become trapped in 
an cndJcss. downward spiral. W"JII we transmigrate 
forever along the paths of ml. or can we succeed in 
directing our li"'5 into an orbit of good? As evidmctd in many of his writinp, Nichiren repeatedly 
stresses the aucia1 importance of the heart, or 
mind. ID this inner realm of life. the potential resides 
for dramatic shifts from evil to good or from good 
to evil That is why Nicbiren', teaching Qf enlightm• 
ment can be viewed as a process that begins with 
inner change. In other words, through the power of 
f.a.ith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us 
that are governed by the fundamental darkness in all 
human hearts and manifest the positive functions 
of life that are one with the Dharma nature-our 
Buddhahood. (p. 5) 
10 
A Humanistic. 
People-centered Religion 
Nichiren had deep insight into the potential of 
human beings. discerning that they could free themselves from a cycle of negative transmigration and 
realize a positive one through profound inner 
change. And he set forth a practical way to enable aU 
people to achieve this. Consequently, there is no 
other teaching that can more deservedly be called 
humanistic than Nichiren Buddhism. In "The True 
Aspect of All Phenomena," Nichiren writes: 
•Though it is thought that Shakyamuni Buddha 
possesses the three virtues of sovereign, teacher, and 
parent for the sake of all of us living beings, that is 
not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who 
endow him with the three virtues" (WND-1, 384). 
This passage describes a shift from an authoritarian 
to a humanistic, people-centered religion. The 
teaching of Nichiren, who established the concrete 
means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime, 
makes this shift possible. (p. 7) 
The Fundamental Purpose of Our Lives 
Only by winning over our inner darkness and negativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our 
full potential. The same is true if we wish to savor 
true fulfillmenL Allow me to emphasize, then, that 
the Nichiren Buddhist practice toward attaining 
Buddbabood in this lifetime is the only means to 
a,nquer the darkness and delusion that are the 
fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate 
true independence. It allows us to construct a solid 
- 
and achieve a state of life of boundless happiness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood in 
this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental purpose of an individual's life. (p. 8) 
Changing the Destiny of All Humanity 
The -0nly way for human beings to change is for 
them to conquer their inner darkness and rediscover the eternal dignity within their own lives. 
Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people 
are originally endowed will directly lead to a change 
in the destiny of humankind. With that conviction, 
we of the SGI have been working to build a network 
of good all around the globe. (p. 9) 

[2} 
The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo-
Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through Correct Buddhist Practice 
The practice of chanting Nam-myohorenge-kyo contains immeasurable benefit, 
for it enables us to summon forth in our 
own lives the limitless power of the Mystic Law, 
the fundamental law of the universe. 
truth innate in all life" ( The \ Vritings of Nichiren 
Daishonin. vol. 1, p. 3). 
Nichiren Daishonin actualized happiness for 
all humankind through the boundless beneficial 
power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The doctrinal 
basis for this endeavor is set forth with great simplicity and conciseness in the opening passage of 
"On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime": "If 
you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of 
birth and death you have endured since time 
without beginning and to attain without fail 
unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime. you 
must perceive the mystic truth that is originally 
inherent in all living beings. This truth is 
Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo 
will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic 
This passage encapsulates the profound principles of Buddhism and the religious revolution 
to bring about the enlightenment of all people 
that was begun by Shakyamuni Buddha and completed by Nichiren. Each word and phrase is 
infused with the sublime wisdom of Buddhism. 
"To free oneself from the sufferings of birth 
and death endured since time without beginning" 
relates to the fundamental questions of human 
existence and the original purpose of religion. "To 
attain unsurpassed enlightenment" constitutes 
the profound Buddhist response to these questions. "To perceive the mystic truth inherent in all 
living beings» is this response further refined and 
deepened based on the philosophy of the Lotus 
Sutra. And 
11chanting Myoho-renge-kyo" refers to 
the practice established by Nichiren to enable all 
1 1 

r 
On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
people to translate this Buddhist "-sdom into 
action. The rcaliution of this pnk.1ict is the fruit 
of great compusion that aspirtS for the happiness 
of all people. and indicates the truly revolutionary 
na- of Nic:himi Buddhism. 
Through mis pamgc as a whole, it becomes 
elm that die -of chanling Nam-lll)'Ohomige--kyo eSbb&hecl by NicbiRn is the correct 
mdsapdlr" '8ocMtriqnaice Wthe shon 
cipming ,_.. s11cx:w2ly aniaJ1ales the pro-
6,and -,b1s «BoMhism mstilled over more 
than two millennia, and the compassion and 
wisdom for leading all people to enlightenment 
found in Nichiren Buddhism. 
The purpose of this installment is to confirm 
that Nichiren's practice of chanting Nam-myohorenge-kyo represents the ultimate form of correct 
Buddhist practice, and that its establishment 
marks the start of a genuinely people-centered 
Buddhism that makes it possible for all 
humankind to achieve the same enlightened state 
as the Buddha. 
Happiness_ 
If JOU wish to free :,ourself fmm the sufferings of birth and death you have 
enclmcl &ma time without beginning ,nd to attain without fail unsurpassed 
eolighteo,,,,.,, in dus lifnime, you must percdve the mystic truth that is originally iabermt in all living bc:inp. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting 
Myobo-renge-k.yo will tberdore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in 
all life. l"Oa Aruualog Buc1dbehood in Toil l.dclimr: 1'ht Writ111gs of Nid1ire11 Daisl1011i11, vol. J, p. 3) 
Let us start by considering the profound 
meaning of the opening phrase, "Jf you 
wish to free yourself from the ,uffering5 of 
birth and death you have endured since time 
without beginning . .. " 
12 
Nichiren Daishonin's reference to "the sufferings of binb and death endured since time 
without beginning" is premised on the concept of 
transmigration, according to which living beings 
undergo an unceasing, suffering-filled cycle of 

birth and death that continues from the infinite 
past into the infinite future. Buddhism holds that 
this never-ending round of suffering ultimately 
arises from earthly desires, and that a negative 
cycle of earthly desires, karma and suffering is 
part and parcel of transmigration. In this sense, 
"the sufferings of birth and death endured since 
time without beginning" also represents an interminable succession of illusion and suffering. 
Because the thought of such endless transmigration is ultimately unbearable, people naturally 
came to wish for a way to put an end to this 
painful cycle and free themselves from the chains 
of delusion and suffering. 
In Buddhism, there are two basic approaches to 
liberation from the suffering of this cycle. One 
view holds that people can free themselves from 
the endless karmic cycle of birth and death by 
eradicating earthly desires believed to cause it. The 
other is the Mahayana approach, in which the 
essence oflife that undergoes transmigration is not 
viewed as a transient, impermanent phenomenon. 
The Mahayana teachings, for example, espouse 
the concept of undergoing the cycle of birth and 
death in accordance with the bodhisattva vow to 
guide living beings to enlightenment; or they view 
the oscillation between birth and death as a cycle 
of emerging from and returning to the fundamental, all-embracing life of the universe. The 
latter view can be easily understood using the 
metaphor of waves on the ocean: birth is like a 
wave appearing on the surface of the ocean-the 
life of the universe--while death is the wave submerging back into that ocean. Gaining such an 
understanding of the essence of our own lives, 
which repeat the cycle of birth and death, is to 
attain "unsurpassed enlightenment," the highest 
awakening of the Buddha. 
The Mystic Truth Embraces 
and Is Inherent in All Things 
In this passage, to "perceive the mystic truth that is 
originally inherent in all living beings" means to 
"attain unsurpassed enlightenment." The wisdom 
to apprehend this universally inherent truth represents the supreme enlightenment of the Buddha. 
The point where Buddhism radically departs 
from many other philosophies and religions is 
that it uncovered within the individual's own life 
the Law, or limitless inner power. for resolving all 
suffering on the most essential level A Buddha is 
one who, based on this Law, has attained the ultimate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to 
suffering and construct indestructible happiness. 
Buddhism is a teaching of unparaUeled 
humanism that stresses the boundless potential 
within human beings. That's why it is called the 
"internal way." 
To "perceive the mystic truth that is originally 
inherent in all living beings:Qis to "attain unsurpassed enlightenment"; it is the sole means for 
freeing oneself from .. the sufferings of birth and 
death endured since time without beginning." 
This is Shakyamunts starting point, and the 
entirety of Budd.hist thoughL The scripture that 
proclaims this philosophy of the "internal way" is 
the lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people can 
attain enlightenment. The Lotus Sutra could be 
said to embody the ultimate principle of respect 
for human dignity. 
In this writing, Nichiren Daishonin says that 
the "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all 
living beingsu is the "principle of the mutually 
inclusive relationship of a single moment of life 
and all phenomena." This latter principle refers to 
the inscrutable relationship that exists between 
1 3 

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Llfetln1e 
ourselvcs-<>ur minds or each lite-mon\cnt-nd 
the universe; its meaning is that all phenomena 
are contained in one's life and that one's life 
pervades all phenomena. This principle no 
doubt corresponds in meaning to the "'principle 
of inhcren-e and pervasion"1 articulated by 
Nichibn. an early cightecnth,--entury restorer 
of Nichittn Buddhism, in describing the doctrine of "'thttt thousand realms in a single 
moment of life.• 
The cosmic life enfolds and pervades everything. and because it does so, it is also inherent in 
all things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our 
individual lives lies at the heart of the -Principle 
of dH- nu11N0y indusne Rlationsbip ,:,fa single 
fflOIDm1 oflifeand• pbrnomena.•To awaken to 
this DIJSlicuada is1Dauain abe Buddha's •unsurpaaed enlpo■■wut• 
Naming ,-Mystic Tnltlt 
The quation u how to enable an people to perceive this •mymc truth that is originally 
inbm:min all liring beinp • Awidely acxessible 
Jlnddbim, will DCJt be possible if only a very 
limited nornber of people can follow the way set 
forth for apprehmding the mystic truth. Before 
N"lduren Daishonin. the Gttat Teacher T'ieot•ai of Cl1ina tried to establish the means for 
perceiving this mystic truth through the practice of observing the mind, abo known u the 
practice of conc.entration and insighL But it wu 
not a means readily accessible to the people of 
the Latter Day of the Law. 
The initial step N"u:hiren took in opening the 
great path to universal enlightenment was to 
name the mystic truth. The universally inherent 
mystic truth originally had no name, but as 
Nichiren explains in "The Entity of the Mystic 
I.aw," a sage awakened to this truth in his own life 
14 
could give it the most appropriate name (sec 
\\TND-1, 421).2 Naming something is a creative 
process. Giving a name that accurately grasps the 
essence of a thing has the important effect of 
making that essence available to all people; it 
enables all people to share in its value. 
In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," as indicated by the passage "the mystic 
truth that is originally inherent in all living beings 
is Myoho-renge-kyo," Nichiren states that this 
mystic truth that constitutes the fundamental 
Law of the universe is none other than Myohorcnge-kyo. Strictly speaking, the term Myohorenge-kyo existed prior to this as the title of the 
Lotus Sutra, but Nichiren was the first to identify 
Myobo-renge-kyo as being the name of the principle of the "true aspect of all phenomena,"3 
which the Lotus Sutra teaches is the profound 
wisdom of all Buddhas. Also, although the "Life 
Span"' chapter of the Lotus Sutra expounds the 
life of the eternal Buddha from the standpoint of 
Shakyamuni, it was Nichiren who first revealed 
that the essence of the Buddha's eternal life-the 
"heart of the 'Life Span' chapter"-is Myohorenge-kyo (see "The Object of Devotion for 
Observing the Mind," WND-1, 3 71). 
The eternal Buddha, since attaining enlightenment in the remote past, repeatedly undergoes the 
qde of birth and death as a Buddha while appearing in various forms within the Ten Worlds• for the 
salvation of all living beings. The "Life Span" chapter reveals that living beings of the Ten Worlds 
(including Buddhas), and the phenomena of birth 
and death as well, are all manifestations of the great 
eternal life of the universe. Because Nichiren says 
that the"heart of the'Life Span' chapter" is Myohorenge•.kyo, we can infer that Myoho-renge-kyo is 
the name of the great, eternal, universal Hfe that is 
revealed in the "Life Span" chapter. 
Living beings in the nine worlds> repeatedly 
undergoing birth and death, also follow the 

rhythm of birth and death of emerging from and 
submerging back into the great eternal life that 
is Myoho-renge-kyo. They are embraced by 
Myoho-renge-kyo, and at the same time possess 
Myoho-renge-kyo within them. This is why 
Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the "mystic truth 
that is originally inherent in all living beings." 
It was Nichiren who first declared that 
Myoho-renge-kyo is to be chanted and spread in 
the Latter Day of the Law. 
Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo To Perceive the Mystic Truth 
and Establish the Buddhism of the People 
The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, true and correct in both word and principle. Its words are the ultimate reality, and this reality is the Mystic Law 
(myoho). It is called the Mystic Law because it reveals the principle of the 
mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena. 
That is why this sutra is the wisdom of all Buddhas. 
Life at each moment encompasses the body and mind and the self and 
environment of all sentient beings in the Ten Worlds as well as all insentient 
beings in the three thousand realms, including plant- sky. earth, and even 
the minutest particles of dust. Life at each moment permeates the entire realm 
of phenomena and is revealed in all phenomena. To be awakened to this 
principle is itself the mutually inclusive relationship of life at each moment 
and all phenomena. cWND- t. JJ 
Nichiren Daishonin's next step in opening 
this great path was to establish the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
He appended the word nau-a transliteration of 
the Sanskrit word m1mas. meaning "devotion"-
to the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo, and 
established the practice of invoking this truth. 
Nam means "to dedicate one's life." Chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo aloud represents a determination and vow to dedicate one's life to the 
realm of truth of Myoho-renge-kyo in thought, 
word and deed. 
1 S 

On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
At the same time, chanting Nam-myohorenge-1-.·yo enables each person to a"-ualize a way 
of life based on the universal trut.h of Myohorenge-1-.-yo. The crucial point in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-1-.-yo in Nkhiren Buddhism is not 
simply intoning the name of an a1ernal truth. It 
constitutes a practicr to actually summon forth 
the inner truth that pen-adcs the universe and our 
own - 
and I- our lives in accord with that 
truth. This practicr could be described as a 
BUDQHISM 
tNA 
NE'«IL4GHT 
SHIH YATOHI 
Pl'O\:<'SS of establishing a self capable of nctivating 
and tappit'lg from within the "mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings." 
Looking back on the history of Buddhism, 
even though the Lotus Sutra has taught the 
awakening to this mystic truth, over time people 
lost sight of its existence within their own lives. 
It was in that context that T'ien-t'aj established 
the meditative practice for observing the mind 
based on the principles of "three thousand 
A -NEW LIGHT 
IS That 
Buddhist Practice 
t 
essays by Shin Yatomi 
e meaning of freedom and 
ogance and confidence, 
meaning of faith and 
dhists. By applying the 
e reiterated in this small 
conditional value of all 
hat it is not. You will be 
udlentic Buddhist sense 

realms in a single moment of life" and the "mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of 
life and all phenomena." He thereby sought to 
enable people to summon forth the world of 
Buddhahood. T'ien-t'ai's meditation of observing the mind could be viewed as an appropriate 
practice that restored the correct path of the 
Lotus Sutra. 
Further, in order to enable all people to 
perceive and actualiz,e the "mystic truth originally 
inherent in all living beings," Nichlren gave it the 
name Myoho-renge-kyo and established the practice of invoking that name-the practice of 
chanting Narn-myoho-renge-kyo. By doing so, he 
opened the way for all people to dedicate their 
lives to and live based on the mystic truth. 
Thus Nichiren established the means by 
which all people can awaken to the truth of life 
and the universe within their own lives and 
actively manifest that truth. Moreover, this truth 
is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is 
revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest 
teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on 
that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value. 
Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth 
accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no matter what his or her background. It would be no 
exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism 
gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This practice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist 
practice, making it possible for us to fundamentally transform our Lives. 
In other words, to chant Nam-myoho-rengekyo is to summon forth our own innate 
Buddhahood.5 It is the direct path to manifesting 
that highest state of life. The wisdom and compassion of a Buddha that emerges through 
chanting enriches our life-condition, and brings 
happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as 
more and more people come to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves 
and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance 
of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha 
and to ultimately transform even the destiny of 
humankind. 
Salute to the Rise of the 
Buddhism of the Sun 
Another point we should bear in mind regarding 
the true meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is 
that it is also the name of the life of the Buddha 
of the Latter Day, Nichiren Daishonin. Nam-myoho-renge-k-yo and the life of the original 
Buddha are indivisibly connected. We could say 
that the fundamental truth of Myoho-renge-kyo 
that pervades life and the universe was only identified and established for the first time through 
Nichiren himself practicing it and manifesting it 
in his behavior. He gave concrete e:cpression to 
the law that people had not been able to perceive 
up to that point 
Nichiren's life as the Buddha of the Latter Day 
is a life dedicated to battling evil and vanquishing 
ignorance. The struggle to free people from all 
misfortune and misery in the world-from all 
negative karma and the sufferings of birth, aging, 
sickness and death-ultimately entails battling 
the fundamental darkness or ignorance that gives 
rise to all evil and suffering. 
17 

On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
_, _____ ..::.::.::::::.::::.:-::.:=:..::.:.:.:.=.::..:.::..:.::.:.-:.:..:..;:.:.:.. _________________ ;
-
As Nichircn indic.ates when he says that the 
Nam-myoho-rengc-l1ro he chants for the happiness of self and others toward the realization 
of kosen-rufu clears "the douds of ignorance" 
(see "'The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms," 
\'{ND-2, 85), Nam-rnyoho-renge-l..1'0 truly has 
the power to dispel life's darkness. ,l\1hcn we 
chant Narn-myoho-renge-lq•o, the sun of Buddhahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and 
delusion, like hea,1· clouds shrouding the sun, 
are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood 
comes to shine within us, the darkness of 
ignorance vanishes. 
Bot Nachirm Bnddbian is not a teaching in 
which Nicbirm alone shines like the sun. lt is a 
traching in which an of us can bring the sun of 
Baaddbabood to rile in om ma just as he did. We 
-11'111y bblullein dllltweca manKrstthc same 
bn1fiml ..... «Buddbabood •Nidmn. 
In 1his npnl. Nid,ibn wrils -when one 
embam and has midi in 1bis Gohmm>I\ and 
L C 
1'7T...U-n•dl.-n.r._..._. ..... aillmlik 
aadl....:W..-•llilSi=Wv ll\oiliip"1111--
•fllie.,._5iml••__.dw,aiqlra.....__.penlliaa.' 
Aa:mllils•tliilprilaflr.. ,t 
____ ..,_ 
al 
..... _.,.,.......... 
. 
%. -------sllil ..... ------die 
.,._,...., ..... ..,.1-J_.....,.._, __ 
--.. - ...... ,-cipk ........ -
.... 
.... .,,__._._iltliil....tafullil/p1-l..,..J 1ba1 
Ii t 
..,,___._ ... 61:11...i,..s1ir....sir 
.., .... 11iaritlfltt1-lbal ilM,rabo .... , 2$&il _ridliD it 
••·pt: 
, , .. llc'flll-.W.llldtllcdae...._. 
---•lldiils•-•llaml.A..,..wllopqcaimdlil1-will 
._.._tllc_aaddle6Claflll dtch •ddm t 
MIJ"'f"1111 
....,,afdlcw,llk1-'WND-l,'1lJ. 
J. true-.ecsfll•pt:□rrrr'111eallilmltrnld&orMlitrtbaa,._... 
- pt:m re re-Ill ii ill• wa, .,._ nm diem.Aprilldpleapalld 
ill "£qNdiall ..... -lbr- dlapwafdieJ.araSuua. la diewri&-
.. lilied "TIie Tnlt A,pca ol All .....__,.. Nidiia ddiDal •• 
,._...-• .a IIYiltlbc:illlJllld dacirCDmllllllCIIII ill lbc Ten Woddt, 
lllld"dw tnat lllpfd' • 1hr a- al --k,o. die ukimat, reality 
pcrmlilJI all firiAI bciap ,ad lbcir CIIW-11 Ill 1111' ol 1hr Tell 
World&.All .,t,aa,-,. -IU!al,asenw,ifa!llioot Q(lhil lllliwnll uwi 
18 
pllrmaxaa ,ad cJir --- U1lda -
uucpuJblc ,ad --4111L The 
.Eq,ediall...,. cbapra driiD die U1lda dial all pc,c,plc -
iabacDdr 
-hants Nam-t\\yoho-rcngc-kyu, one's life immcdiatdy ba-omcs the object of devotion of three 
thousand realms in a single life-moment. It 
becomes the life of Nichiren Daishonin."
11 The 
practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is 
the supreme path to attaining Buddhahood 
through which each person can become a shining 
sun in his or her own right. 
The great nineteenth-century Russian poet 
Aleksandr Pushkin sings: "Before the bright 
dawn, even so / Shall flicker and die every 
sophistry jaded / At reason's unperishing spark. / 
Salute to the sunrise, and vanish the dark!"7 
Nichiren Buddhism is the Buddhism of the 
sun that opens the path of life's supreme victory 
for all humankind. With "Salute to the sunrise!" 
as our rallying cry, let us dynamically advance in 
the struggle to dispel the darkness of ignorance in 
people's hearts. 
0 
mdowal with lhc potential to become Buddhas, and can tap and manifest 
tlm)IClfClldal. 
'- The 'Jim Worlds are ten distinct rttlms or categories of beings referred to in 
lluddbill ICriptura. From the lowest to the highest, the realms of ( 1) hell, 
(2) bamsr, apirita. (3) animals, (4) asurru, (5) human beings, (6) heavenly 
liclap, (7) 'l!Oia-barcn, (8) cause-awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and 
(10) luddbaa. flom lhc ttmdpoinl of the Lotus Sutra, the Ten Worlds indiai. &ea pota1tia1 aata or conditions that a person can manifest or 
aperimct.Allo induda lhc concept of the nine worlds, which indicates all 
dlc-W. Cllbcr cbUI Buddhas. 
5. Nicbna writ-= "'Ibadorc, when once we chant Myoho-renge-kyo, with 
jula M IUllle-.id we summon forth and manifest the Buddha natu-c.of 
aD Buddbal; aD abf.enca; all bodhisattvas; all voice-hearers; all the de,ucs 
aidl • llnlma. Shakra, lllld King Yama; the sun and moon, and the myriad 
,wa; die beawaly gocb and earthly deities, on down to hdl-dweUm, 
bwipy aplrill, aalmak, asuru, human and heavenly beings, and all other 
liviaglidap. 1bit blcuing ii imrncuurablc and boundless" ("How Those 
lailially AlpiriDg to lht Wq Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus 
Suua." WND-1, 887). 
6. a-..,,,,_,, on di, •71u Obj«, of Dtvo1io11 for Obsmi11g the Milld," in 
Nidulrtln Sbomn -,danshu (The C.Ommentaries of Nichiklln Shonin) 
(Tok)o: 5cikJo Shimbwuha. 1980), p. 548. 
7. AlekiaDdr Plllhkin, Pushkin 11,rrefold; Narrative, Lyric, Pu/emir, a11d Rib11/,I 
V.,11, vlllllalcd by Wal&cr Arndl (New York: E. P. Dutton and Co., Inc., 
1mi.,.20. 

Key Points 
Uncovering People's Inner Potential 
The point where Buddhism radically departs from 
many other philosophies and religions is that it 
uncovered within the individual's own life the Law, 
or limitless inner power, for resolving all suffering 
on the most essential level. A Buddha is one who, 
based on this Law, has attained the ultimate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and 
construct indestructible happiness. Buddhism is a 
teaching of unparalleled humanism that stresses 
the boundless potential within human beings. 
That's why it is called the "internal way." (p. 13) 
The Mystic Truth of Life 
and the Universe 
The cosmic life enfolds and pervades everything, 
and because it does so, it is also inherent in all 
things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our individual lives lies at the heart of the "principle of the 
mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment 
of life and all phenomena." To awaken to this mystic truth is to attain the Buddha's "unsurpassed 
enlightenment." (p. 14) 
The Meaning of Chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
Chanting Narn-myoho-renge-kyo enables each person to actualize a way of life based on the universal 
truth of Myoho-renge-kyo. The crucial point in 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren 
Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an 
external truth. It constitutes a practice to actually 
summon forth the inner truth that pervades the 
universe and our own selves and live our lives in 
accord with that truth. This practice could be 
described as a process of establishing a self capable 
of activating and tapping from within the "mystic 
truth originally inherent in all living beings." (p. 16) 
Establishing a Buddhism of the People 
Nichiren established the means by which all people 
can awaken to the truth of life and the universe 
within their own lives and actively manifost that 
truth. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened 
wisdom of all Buddhas and is revealed in the Lotus 
Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism. 
By basing ourselves on that truth, we can Jead lives 
of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this 
realm of truth accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no matter what his or her background. It 
would be no exaggeration to say that the practice 
of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren 
Buddhjsm gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. 
This practice of chanting is indeed the supreme 
Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fundamentaJly transform our lives. (p. 17) 
The Direct Path to 
Manifesting Buddhahood 
To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to summon 
forth our own innate Buddhahood. It is the direct 
path to manifesting that highest state of life. The 
wisdom and compassion of a Buddha that emerges 
through chanting enriches our life-condition, and 
brings happiness to ourselves and others.. Further, 
as more and more people come to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves 
and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance 
of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha 
and to ultimately transform even the destiny of 
humankind. (p. 17) 
Causing the Sun of 
Buddhahood To Rise Within 
As Nichiren indicates when he s.,ys that the Nam-myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the happiness of self 
and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu 
clears "the clouds of ignorance" (see "The Doctrine 
of the Three Thousand Realms." W'ND-2, 85), Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly bas the power to dispel life's 
darkness. When we chant Nam-myobo-renge-kyo, 
the sun of Budd.hahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the 
sun> are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood 
comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance 
vanishes. But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching 
in which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a 
teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of 
Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We are 
truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same brilliant life-state of Budd.hahood as Nichiren. (p. 18) 
19 

•--,;,.-.:_::--; - 
.. - ...... - ◄ 
..,...,.....-
. 
•\ 
[3) 
•if You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, 
You Are Not Embracing the Mystic Law" 
&m thoagli yotlchantand believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law 
i5 ontsick }Olltlaf, you ae embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior 
taching -infmortac:tring" means those [Buddhist teachings] other than this 
[Lotus] 1111D, which are aD apedient and provisional. No expedient or provisional teaching leads directly to enlightenment, and without the direct path to 
mJigbtenmrnt ,ou cannot attain Buddbahood, even if you practice lifetime 
after lifetime for anmt1eas blpu. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is 
tbell bnpoFFiblt. - 
when you chant myoho and recite renge, 1 you must 
tpmmc,n up deep faith that Myoho-reng-kyo is your life itself. ("On Attaining 
Bmldbehood in Tb Lifctimt,• 77se Wrilings D{Nrdiiren Daislumin, voL 1, p. 3) 
To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to commune with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist 
practice for fusing our lives with th.is Law. 
At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the 
inner darkness that prevents this fusion from taking place. When, through our practic.e of faith, we 
vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance 
and become one with the Mystic Law, its infinite 
power unfolds in our lives. Such is the immeasurable benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
The essence of this practice established and 
propagated by Nichiren Daishonin is to chant 
20 
. 
' 
-, 
... 

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo filled with a seeking 
spirit to continually develop our faith or confidence in its power. "It is the heart that is 
important:' Nichiren asserts ("The Strategy of the 
Lotus Sutra:• WND-1, 1000). When it comes to 
chanting, therefore, we should above all strive to 
summon forth the courage with which to overcome illusion without being defeated by the 
"three obstacles and four devils."2 
Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the ultimate 
mystic truth, and Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the 
name of the life-state of Buddhas who embody 
and reveal this truth. Thus, when we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with conviction, the infinite 
benefit of Myoho-renge-kyo unfolds in our lives. 
This is what it means to bring forth the world of 
Buddhahood. 
At work here is the principle of "cause and 
effect in a single moment of life,"3 in which faith 
is the cause and manifesting the life-state of Buddhahood is the effect. When we continue 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo through times 
of both suffering and joy while striving for our 
own happiness and that of others, we can establish as the core and innermost essence of our lives 
the benefit of the cause and effect for attaining 
Buddhahood-which are themselves contained 
within the practice of chanting. "When we do so, 
the indomitable state of Buddhahood emerges 
within us. This is the meaning of "attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime." 
In his treatise "The Object of Devotion for 
Observing the Mind:' Nichiren states: "Shakyamuni Buddha, who has attained perfect 
enlightenment, is our own flesh and blood. His 
practices and the resulting virtues are our bones 
and marrow" (WND-1, 365). He explains that to 
embrace Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself attaining 
enlightenment} The power of chanting Nammyo-o-renge-kyo enables us to actualize cause 
and effect in a single moment of life-that is, 
faith (cause) leading to the manifestation of our 
Buddhabood (effect). 
Considered in this light, one's voice chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the voice of unshakable faith and seeking spirit that breaks through 
the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and 
sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is 
also the courageous lion's roar that issues forth 
from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of 
chanting. 
The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is 
not only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is 
also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we 
should always try to chant resoundingly, with a 
vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a galloping horse. 
It can also be said that the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which we affirm 
that we ourselves are inherently entities of 
Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to 
return to our true, original selves and tap the 
innate life force that we have possessed from time 
without beginning. 
Nichiren declares: "There is no true happiness 
for human beings other than chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo" ("Happiness in This World," 
WND-1, 681). This happiness. he says. is the 
"boundless joy of the Law."5 "Joy of the Law" 
describes the unshakable happiness and peace 
of mind inherent in all existence. To experience 
this joy means to fully savor and enjoy the infinite life force that is one with the Mystic Law. 
Nich.iren explJ.ins that the only way for us to 
taste the joy of the Mystic Law is th.rough chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
21 

On Attaining Buddhahood In This Lifetime 
The Mystic Law and 
Incomplete Teachings 
Given that chanting Nam-m)'Oho-renge-lq'Ohas 
such profound meaning, it is crucial to remember 
when we chant that Myoho-rengc-lq'Ois our lives 
themselves. If"" lose sight of this point, then no 
matter how mudl "" may chant, we will have 
dcparttd from the pnctia of chanting taught by 
N"icbircn Daisbonin. 
Therefore. in •on Attaining Buddhahood in 
This Lifetime," N"achircn writtS in strm warning, 
"'Ew:n though J011 daant ad- in Myobo-
- 
if you think the Law is outside yourself, 
you m embracing not the Mystic law but an inferior tr&hing• (WND-1, 3). "'lnfmor• here means 
•incornpier,•The Mystic law is the ultimate truth 
dlllis pafmand ,m1,pku;-amttast,an incomplert tm:bmg 5Cl5 bib onlya panial truth. 
lbc .-passage mmains • profonod philosophy tbal ovammes 1J11e of the serious pitfalls 
to which religion lcDds to s11m1rnb. It also 
cmbodia a aucial philosophy of faith for attaining genuine bappinm. 
Rdigion is gmmDy held to be a universal 
endeavor to cmmect the human being to the infinite, absohne and uaed. While in a ICllSC this may 
be true. it seam that many religions postulate 
from the outset a separation between the secular 
and the samd. and between human beings and 
gods or Buddhas, and thus seek to bridge that gap. 
N"ichircn. however, regarcil teachings that view 
the absolute or saaed as separate from human 
beings as incompldc:. And he cites as an wmple 
the provisional. pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, which 
do not set forth the principles or practices that 
enable ordinary people to attain Buddhahood in 
this lifetime. Rather, they espouse that one must 
first undergo innumerable blpas • of austere 
practice before enlightenment an be achieved. 
22 
In the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, 
a ,irtually insurmountable gulf exists between 
Buddhas and ordinary people. Only a very few 
exceptional practitioners who, after having 
undergone austerities for countless kalpas, can 
even attempt to reach the goal of enlightenment. 
Moreover, according to these teachings, it is 
inconceivable for someone who has become a 
Buddha to go back to being an ordinary person. 
As a rule, according to these teachings, the world 
where Buddhas dwell is not this strife-filled saha 
world where ordinary people reside. Buddhas and 
ordinary people are completely separate. Therefore, as long as that divide exists between the 
world of Buddhahood and the nine worlds ( the 
realm of ordinary beings), it naturally follows 
that there is no way for all people to attain 
enlightenment In this worldview, ordinary people and the idealized Buddhas are poles apart, 
thus leaving ordinary people with no option but 
to aspire for salvation through the assistance or 
intervention of such Buddhas. 
This perceived separation between the nine 
worlds and the world of Buddhahood7 is demolished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of "three 
thousand realms in a single moment of life"-
in other words, the teaching that "the nine 
worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and 
that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds" 
("The Selection of the Time," WND-1, 539).8 
Here we can see the immense importance of the 
Lotus Sutra principle of the "mutual possession 
of the Ten Worlds." 
Nichiren opened the way to actualizing this 
latter principle, which is the key to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the 
practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This 
constitutes in its fullest and most complete form 
the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlightenment for all human beings. 

- -------- ------
-
Summoning Forth and Manifesting 
the Buddha Nature 
The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the 
universe. Its universality transcends our individual selves. As indicated by its description as the 
"mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings," however, the Mystic Law also exists 
within our lives ("On Attaining Buddhahood in 
This Lifetime,"WND-1, 3). It both resides within 
us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic 
Law is inherent in our lives because it is the allembracing Law that pervades everything in the 
universe. 
In his writing "How Those Initially Aspiring 
to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the 
Lotus Sutra," Nichiren explains the essence of 
Myoho-renge-kyo as follows: "As for the meaning 
of Myoho-renge-kyo: The Buddha nature inherent in us, ordinary people; the Buddha nature of 
SCI President Ikeda with 
Brazilian Association of 
Municipalities President 
Jose do Carmo Carcia, 
Tokyo, July 20, 2006. 
Brahma, Shakra, and the other deities; the Buddha nature of Shariputra, Maudgalyayana, and 
the other voice-hearers; the Buddha nature of 
Manjushri, Maitreya, and the other bodhisattvas; 
and the -[ystic Law that is the enlightenment of 
the Buddhas of the three e.'ristences, are one and 
identical. This principle is called -[yoho-rengekyo" (WND-1, 887). 
Not only is Myoho-renge-kyo our own Buddha nature, he says, but it is also the Buddha 
nature of all heavenly deities, voice-hearers, 
bodhisattvas and so on. Moreover, this Buddha 
nature is identical to the Mystic Law to which the 
Buddhas of the three existences-past, present 
and future---are enlightened. 
Nich.iren then goes on to explain that the 
chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a practice 
in which we "summon forth and manifest" the 
Buddha nature inherent in the lives of all beings of 
the Ten Workls: "Therefore, when once we chant 
23 

L
On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
Myoho-rengc-k,'O. with just that single s◊\md we 
boohisattvas throughout the universe manifest, 
summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of but those chanting Nam-myoho-rcngc-kyo can 
all Buddhas; .all --istcncts; all bodhis.itttvas; all 
also sever the chains of fundamental darkness 
voice-hearers; all the deities such as Brahma, 
Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and 
the myriad stars; the heavenly gods and earthly 
dories, on down to hell-<iwcllers, hungry spirits, 
animals, wras, human and heavenly beings, and 
all other lning beings. This blessing is immeasurable and boundless" (WND-1, 88i). 
R.cgarding the mmung of dlanting Nammyobo-rmgt-lJO. be further states: •when we 
l't'\'m M,oho-mige-k)-o inhemlt in our own 
life as thr object of dcwtion. the Buddha nature 
within mis summoned fonb and manifested by 
om chanting of Nam-myobo-rmge-kyo. This is 
what is meant by'Bnddha'• (WND-1, 887). The 
expression •is summoned forth and manifcstccr 
points to the profound significance of the 
Mystic law. 
Nicbircn uses a wonderful metaphor to 
aplain dus princip)e of calling forth and revealing the inner Buddha natuR: "When a caged bird 
sings, birds who are flying in the sky arc thereby 
SUDllDOlltd and gather around, and when the 
bilds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in 
the cage strives to get out" (WND-1, 887). 
The siJJgiDg of the caged bird refers to the 
chanting of Nam-myobo-renge-k)'o by ordinary 
people who, shackled in the chains of fundamental darknesi and earthly desires. arouse faith in 
the Mystic law. lo other words, it is the chanting 
of Nam-myobo-rengc-kyo with faith, which is 
expressed as the determination to win ovtr all 
obstacles and become happy without fail through 
the power of the Mystic Law. 
The power of such strong. determined chant· 
ing calls forth the Buddha nature in all living 
beings. Not only does the Buddha nature of 
Brahma and Shakra and of the Buddhas and 
24 
and illusion, and reveal their own Buddha nature. 
ln other words, it is the power of our voices 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that connects 
our lives with the Mystic Law pervading all phenomena of the three thousand realms.9 
In "Letter to Niike," Nichiren further explains 
the significance of chanting through the analogy 
of a mother bird and an egg.10 He says that the 
chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is "like the 
warmth of the mother bird" (WND-1, 1030). At 
first there is nothing inside the egg but liquid, but 
as a result of being warmed by the mother bird, 
the beak, eyes and feathers are formed. Eventually, 
the baby bird breaks through the shell and hatches, 
and is soon flying into the sky like its mother. In 
this analogy, the substance within the egg represents the Buddha nature of living beings, while 
the mother bird represents the Buddha who leads 
others to enlightenment. The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is at once the voice of faith of 
ordinary people and a function of the life-state of 
Buddhahood. 
Nichiren's most important admonition in 
regard to attaining enlightenment through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that we must not 
view the Law as something outside ourselves. If 
we think the Law exists externally, then we are 
reverting to the kind of divide between Buddhas 
and ordinary people found in the pre-Lotus Sutra 
teachings. 
Perceiving That One's Own Life 
Is Nom-myoho-renge-kyo 
The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has 
immeasurable beneficial power. Josei Toda, the 

second Soka Gakkai president, described the infinite power of the Mystic Law as follows: "It is like 
lying sprawled on your back in a wide-open space 
looking up at the sky. All that you wish for immediately appears. No matter how much you may 
give away, there is always more. It is never 
exhausted. Try and see if you can attain this state 
of life." 
Indeed, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can be likened 
to a "wish-granting jewel." How can we develop the 
boundless state of life that enables us to bring forth 
whatever strength is necessary? President Toda 
often used to say, "If you really want to achieve such 
a state of life, you have to fight with every ounce of 
your being for the Lotus Sutra, for kosen-rufu!" 
Such was the vast and untrammeled spirit of 
my mentor: the spirit to strive forever together 
with the Buddhas of the three existences and with 
the life-affirming functions of the universe such 
as Brahma and Shakra, wherever in the universe 
we might find ourselves; the spirit to actualize a 
world of happiness and peace dedicated to value 
creation, by helping people overcome misery and 
misfortune and the sufferings of birth, aging, 
sickness and death. 
Throughout everything, Mr. Toda steadfastly 
continued to seek the Law that exists nowhere 
but within our own lives. And he stressed the 
importance of living true to oneself. His starting 
point was his profound realization in prison that 
the Buddha is life itself and his awakening to his 
identity as a Bodhisattva of the Earth. 
He also often spoke of the spirit of faith 
we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law within us, saying: "You have to be resolved that 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is your own life!., or 
"Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day 
means firmly believing that your life is nothing 
apart from Nam-myoho-renge-kyo!" This is the 
spirit Nichiren teaches in the passage, "When you 
chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon 
up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life 
itself" ("On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," WND-1, 3). 
A Universal Religion for the 
Happiness of All Humankind 
Generally speaking, religions expound some infinite and eternal entity that transcends both human 
beings and the impermanence of this world, using 
such terms as God or law. Different religions regard 
this infinite and eternal entity variously as a source 
of fear and awe, an object of adoration. a great void 
of emptiness or a wellspring of all-embracing love. 
Nichiren Daishonin saw the power of the 
Mystic Law that encompasses and sustains all 
things in the universe as e.'"Cisting within human 
beings> and he established a means for actually 
manifesting that Law in their lives. 
During my second lecture at Harvard University (in September 1993), Iproposed three areas 
where Mahayana Buddhism could contribute to 
modern civilization: ( l) in fostering the creation 
of peace; (2) in paving the way toward the restoration and rejuvenation of humanity; and (3) in 
providing a philosophical basis for the symbiotic 
coexistence of all things. In connection with the 
second point, Istressed the important significance 
of the approach of Nichiren Buddhism, which 
teaches neither an exclusive reliance on the "power 
of self' nor on the 'l'ower of other." This perspec• 
tive has resonated deeply with many scholars. 
25 

- - --·- ----------
 
On Attaining Buddhahood In This Lifetime 
Only by communing and fusing with the 
power of other-whkh is eternal and tranSc:cnds 
our limited, finite selves--.--an we wholly activate 
the power of self. At the same tirnt, howe\'er, this 
eternal, all-ffl<X>mpassing power of other h"1Ually 
exists inherently in our lives. Nkhiren writes: 
•People arc certainly sclf--empowe- and yet 
they arc not sclf-cmpowettd •.• People arc certainly other- and yet they arc not 
- 
("'The Meaning of the SKRd 
'J'eacbings of 1ht Buddha's Liilime,'" WND-2, 
62)." What dais means.llM:lieve, is lhat bytelying 
L -0...,_,..a .... ,.,,._-die ....... or 
___ _,_.,_lar Na:., .. ..... 
2. ,__...__ ... , . , 
---pllClictaflM+ismt'-t 
....... -__, .. _,.._mlh. 
1. e.-e-a6::taa-.te-d'llfe:nispillciple.._ 
.. 
lbt--a6ctd...._►dft t., dailtialbths 
••,-,le•adaw.fiida..tpllClict.._.cmlbtU,.-
lic1-aaellie 
._.....,,flllllle••llllillluddbnood 
-a 
1 •-•tlir-itfll....,.,..•llmlimmiD 
---
f f I -u,ar.. 
J •••illllf e itl 
•nt 111cU,.-
lic 1-if6r6c1 ,,,..bwllly•il:l111l laddlmduoupoul 
..,_, 
•"'---cz[j 
ec'idlilapm:med 
dwM,-1-mllil-.lie•• ·c 
!iti■dwcoaam 
-■cldleC....,_11wcill;.:tl!F6ri 
rt:!clewaciml. 
a-tiag Jia■.,..... wilb failh .ill dais Gabomm 
C ◄ile+sdarpradiae411f----.w••mi■dia oalerto llllli■ 
Wchhood.,. paa:eitizl die M,llic Lawwidaia cme'a OWD life. 
n.. ii dw principle··- .. -'le,...,_- ia melf 
aaaiaiagcntipln--,r• 
s. ._._-oldwl.-:'Dlilmmaodwbawlitcme._rn... 
ed cizg die M,-1-. h daaibm dll' mliahrawJ w of a 
llad6a.lalmwririll"lllppimaiD111i1 ...... Nidliam1111a: 
"1bar is aonue blppillllafDr bumm bciopadic:rtblll c:baDliag 
-8-Jll!lwa 1be (Lolul] .-a tadi, • ....... !iring 
bcinp eapy daemldwa • -
111ar 1-s Sidrll-' /ls o,.,. 
-4a..,--.p.mJ. Haw'111111dtllil ,_. _-,tbiaa 
bar die bouDdlca joy of tbr Law!"' (WND-1, 611). 
6. AnmnmelJJoagpcriodmtime.Sulrllaodllaliladi&ria tbeir 
dc:fioition',butblpufall iotorwoma,oratcpries, dlOleof mcuunhleaod immealllrablecluratioa.O,,..nplenatiMalflltbeleaglb 
of a 1111111 lwpa at appRllimaldy 1bsom mi11ioa 
Ac.cording 
to Buddhia cosmology,. world repeatedly- four lltap: 
formation, con- cledioe and dilintcgratioa. Each at tbae 
four Slap lasts for twenry miall blpu and la equal to oac medium 
lwpL finally, ooc complclt cydr forms Imajor blpa. 
7. The Ten Worlds are tea dutioct ralma or calqjOria ,. beiap 
rtfemd to in Buddhist Kripturu. From the lowest to the bigbac, 
the mlnuof (l) hdl. (2) hungryipiriu,(3) IIWUla, (4) as111111, (5) 
hlllllm beings, (6) bcaVtnly beings, (7) voia-heatcn, (8) ameawak.cncd ona, {9) bodhisanvu and (10) Buddha. The Lotus 
Sutra tcachei that each of the Ten Worlck cont.aim all tea within it, 
26 
neither exclusively on the power of other nor on 
the power of sdf, we can manifest the power that 
exists within us yet transcends our selves. Chanting Nam-myoho-Tenge-kyo enables us to do this. 
In this way, Nichiren Buddhism opens up a 
broad new vision of a universal religion for the 
happiness of all humankind--one that transcends the approach of teachings that strictly 
divide external power and the individual's own 
powct and that emphasize one over the other. 
0 
aakingitpoaible to interpret them as potential states of life inhereat io each individual being. 
I. -i1ae nine worlds haft the potential for Buddhahood and Buddhabood reblins the nine worlds•: This means that that the lives of 
beiDp in the Dine worlds-the worlds from hell through to bodlti-
- 
endowed with the world of Buddltahood, and that the 
liws al Buddhu are also endowed with the nine worlds. In other 
wmm, ordinary people and Buddhas are essentially the same with 
DO ilillin ttioo between them. 
9. 'llueetbouand realms in a single moment of life is a philosophical 
s,-m allblilbed by Tien-t'ai. The "thrtt thousand realms" indi-
Clla die urying apects and phases that life assumes at each 
1111J111eDL At each moment. life manifests one of the Ten Worlds . 
Eadlofdiaewodds possesses the potential for all ten within itself, 
dms muiDg one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred 
wmlds - 
the ten f'acton and operates within each of the 
dne lalms of aiatencr,, thus making three thousand realms. 
10.Nidmen DaisboniD writa: "Abird's egg contains nothing but liquid. yet by itself this developa into a beak, two eyes, and all the 
otber parts, IOd the bird soars into the sky. We, too, are the eggs of 
iparaac:e, whim are piti6d things, but when nurtured by the 
dwating of Nam-lll)'Oho-renge-kyo, which is like the warmth of 
die modier bird, we dewlop the beak of the thirty-two features 
and the fatben of the eighty characteristics Iof the Buddha] and 
are file to IOU into the sky of the true aspect of all phenomena 
and tberalityohD tbinp" (•Letter to Niike,-WND-1, 1030). 
11.N"x:biren DaisboaiD ltata: "Now in the teachings of the Lotus 
Suua. people arc ccrtlinly aelf-empowered, and yet they are not 
sdf-cmpowen,d. Thia i, because one's own self, or life, at the same 
time poueua the nature of all living beings in the Ten Worlds. 
11ierefore thil ldfbu from the beginning been in the possession of 
o.ne'a owu realm of Buddb•bood md of the realms of Buddhahood 
pouaaed by all Olher living beings. Therefore when one attains 
Bocldbeboocl nne doa not take on some new or 'other' Buddha 
ideatity. 
•Again, ID the teachings of the Lotus Sutra, people are certainly 
otber-cmpowacd, and yet they are not other-empowered. The 
Buddlw, who are c:omidered aeparate from us, are actually conllined within our own llelva, or the lives of us ordinary people. 
1'hOie Buddhas IJllJlifest the realms of Buddhahood of all living 
beiopio tbc 1ame mmner a we do• ("The Sacred Teachings of the 
Buddha', Lifetime;" WND-2, 62). 

Key Points 
The Meaning of Chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to commune 
with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist practice for 
fusing our lives with this Law. At the same time, it 
is a battle to conquer the inner darkness that prevents this fusion from taking place. When, through 
our practice of faith, we vanquish this darkness of 
illusion and ignorance and become one with the 
Mystic Law, its infinite power unfolds in our lives. 
Such is the immeasurable benefit of chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (p. 20) 
The Cause and Effect of 
Attaining Buddhahood 
The power of chanting Narn-myoho-renge-kyo 
enables us to actualize cause and effect in a single 
moment of life-that is, faith (cause) leading to 
the manifestation of our Buddhahood (effect). 
Considered in this light, one's voice chanting 
Nam-myoho- renge-kyo is the voice of unshakable 
faith and seeking spirit that breaks through the 
inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and 
sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is 
also the courageous lion's roar that issues forth 
from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of 
chanting. (p. 21) 
Chanting Like a Galloping Horse 
The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is not 
only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is also 
the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we 
should always try to chant resoundingly, with a 
vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a galloping horse. It can also be said that the chanting 
of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which 
we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities 
of Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to 
return to our true, original selves and tap the 
innate life force that we have possessed from time 
without beginning. (p. 21) 
Bridging the Cap Between 
Buddhas and Ordinary People 
This perceived separation between the nine worlds 
and the world of Buddhahood is demolished by 
the Lotus Sutra doctrine of"three thousand realms 
in a single moment of life" -in other words, the 
teaching that "the nine worlds have the potential 
for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the 
nine worlds" ("The Selection of the Time; WND-1, 
539). Here we can see the immense importance of 
the Lotus Sutra principle of the "mutual possession 
of the Ten Worlds." Nichiren opened the way to 
actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the practice of chanting Nam-myohorenge-kyo. This constitutes in its fullest and most 
complete form the teaching of Buddhism that 
seeks enlightenment for all human beings. (p. 22) 
Manifesting Our Inner Power 
That Transcends Us 
The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the universe. Its universality transcends our individual 
selves. As indicated by its description as the "mystic 
truth that is originally inherent in all living beings," 
however, the Mystic law also e.'cists within our lives 
("On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," 
WND-1, 3). It both resides within us and transcends 
us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in 
our lives because it is the all-embracing Law that 
pervades everything in the universe. ( p. 23) 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
Is Your Own Life! 
[Mr. Toda] also often spoke of the spirit of faith we 
need in order to perceive the Mystic Law within us, 
saying: "You have to be resolved that Nam-myohor-ngl"-kyo is your own life!" or "Propagating the 
Mystic law in the latter Day means firmly believing 
that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myohorenge--kyo!" This is the spirit Nichiren teaches in the 
passag-. "When you chant myolio and recite renge, 
you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-rengek)'Ois your life itself" ("On Attaining Buddhahood in 
This Lifetime," WNO-I, 3 ). (p. 25) 
27 

28 
{4) 
Transfonning Our Fundamental Attitudelll!f,,,siffg To Live an •Endless, Painful Austerity" 
YDII--...- dint 6at any of the eighty thousand sacred teachings of 
5llllymua-i BwJclw•s Jiimne-or any of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the 
111!1'1 di.b.bDIIS a tine aka-mas .e outside yourself. Your practice of the 
BuMhnttncmnp .Unot mine you of the sufferings of birth and death in 
tbelmt11111myua pcrcaft the true nature of your life. If you seek enlightenmmt.nedsidtyoamlf', thm your performing even ten thousand practices and 
tm dl«-n,nd pod deeds wiD be in Ylin. It is like the case of a poor man who 
spends night ad day CDllllting his neighbors wealth but gains not even half a 
min. 1mt is why die T"im-t'ai &dlool's commentary states, "Unless one percaves the nature of one's life, one cannot aadicate one's grave offenses.''1 This 
passage implies that, unJas one perceives the nature of one's life, one's practice will become an eocOm, paiafu1 austerity. Therefore, such students of 
B11eldbiw arernnclernnedunon-Buc:ldhist. [T'ien-t'ai's] Great Concentration 
and Insight states that, although they study Buddhism, their views are no different from those of non-Buddhists. 
Whether you chant the Buddha's name,2 recite the sutra, or merely offer 
flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of 
goodness in your life, With this conviction, you should strive in faith. ("On 
Attaining Buddhahood in Thi. Li{etiiru:." nie Wnti11g, vf Nid11rt11 Daislw11i11, vol. I, pp. 3-4) 

The character myo of myol,o, or "Mystic 
Law," has three meanings: to be fully 
endowed, to open and to revive.' These 
three meanings are all implicit in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. In other words, the chanting 
of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo contains ( l) the myo 
of perfect endowment-meaning that the single 
Law of Myoho-renge-kyo encompasses all phenomena; (2) the myo of transformation that 
"opens" the world of Buddhahood in the lives of 
beings in the nine worlds ( the worlds from hell 
through bodhisattva); and (3) the myo of great 
benefit, whereby a life filled with suffering is 
"revived" as a life of great tranquillity and joy. 
Our lives themselves are entities of the Mystic 
Law. Therefore, they are fully endowed with all 
phenomena. Fundamental darkness and the 
enlightened Dharma nature,1 earthly desires and 
enlightenment, and the nine worlds and the world 
of Buddhahood-all of these exist within us. For 
precisely that reason, we can carry out a mystic 
and fundamental inner "revolution"-changing 
darkness into light; kindling the flame of enlightenment by "burning the firewood of earthly 
desires" (The Record of the Orally Transmitted 
Teachings, p. 11) and thereby manifesting the world 
of Buddhahood in our lives of the nine worlds. 
The key to achieving this profound inner 
transformation is our hearts-our fundamental 
attitude or mind-set. Therefore, Nichiren Daishonin warns in "On Attaining Buddhahood in 
This Lifetime": "If you think the Law is outside 
yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law 
but an inferior teaching" (WND-1, 3). When we 
diligently exert ourselves in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo based on this admonition, 
always remembering that a change in our own 
hearts or minds is crucial, the three meanings of 
myo will clearly manifest themselves in our lives. 
Needless to say, the Law contained in the practice of chanting spread by Nichiren is truly 
wondrous. But even the power of this wondrous 
Law cannot fully manifest in a life clouded by 
ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that 
prevents us from believing in the Mystic Law and 
staying focused on our own Buddha nature and 
that of others. The practice of chanting enables us 
to break through this darkness and vibrantly 
bring forth our Buddhahood. Battling our fundamental darkness-this inner struggle is the 
essence of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
Studying Buddhism Yet Succumbing 
to Non-Buddhist Thinking 
In the passage we are studying this time, Nichiren 
Daishonin strongly cautions: "You must never 
think that any of the eighty thousand sacred 
teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha's lifetime or any 
of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions and three existences are outside yourself" 
(WND-1, 3). The use of the word never here is 
deeply significant This passage e.xplains that the 
entirety of Buddhism is contained within our own 
lives. Nichiren concludes that "the eighty thousand sacred teachings of ShaJ...y.ununi Buddha's 
lifetime" and "the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of 
the ten directions and three ex:istences"s are all 
phenomena inherent with.in us. 
Nichiren goes on to say that as long as we seek 
enlightenment outside ourselves, even our performing "ten thousand practices and ten 
thousand good deeds" (meaning all of the practices expounded in Shakyamuni's lifetime 
teachings) and believing in the protection of the 
Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the three 
existences (meaning the benevolent functions of 
29 

. . vud' J'1ahood in This Lifetime 
on Attaanmg v 
ur 
the universe) will be in vain. Doing so is as pointless as counting a neighbor's wealth, he states, 
because we personally gain nothing from d?.h'lg -0: 
Nichi.ren then cites a passage from a Ticn-t a1 
school commentary, which states, «unless one perceives the nature of one's life, one cannot eradicate 
one's grave offenses" (W1'lD-l, 3-4). If we fai- to 
grasp this point. Nkhiren warns, all of the practt- 
and good deeds we might perform while seeking 
enlightenment outside ourselves will ultimately 
become •an endless, painful austerity" (\\11\'D-l, 4). 
What does it mean to say that unless we perceive the DIIIIR of our liws. we cannot eradicate 
our grave offmses? - 
o&nses• here can be 
taken to indicate fundammtal darkness, which is 
the sounz of all ml The grave offense of slanda--denignding the Law or the mrrect teaching 
of Buddhism-erises from fundarnmtal darkness 
or igoorancc. 
In T"im-t'm .. , Budcfbipn, it is only poss1"ble to 
eradicm 1his - 
through the practic.c of 
observing 0116 mind-m 01Da' words, through 
wisdom. In Nidum1 Boddbism, l:aowewr, fundammtal darbm can be ovamme by the sharp 
sword of mdi m aamd with the principle of 
.substituting faith for wisdom... This is the 
essmcr of the practicz of chanting Nam-myoborenge-kyo. 
To map, if we se6 enlightenment outside of 
us, we are not pursuing the path of •observing 
one's mind,• which enables us to ovaaxne the 
fundarner,tal evil of ignorance or darlmtM. ID 
that case, all our dforts and good deeds to attain 
enligbtcmneot will be lacking the vital .ingredient; 
they will be every bit as futile as c.ountiog a neighbor's vast riches. Moreover, becaU$e none of cbese 
efforts will help us eradicate our ignorance, they 
will only bec.ome "an endless, painful austerity." 
This battle against ignorance is the heart of 
Buddhism. It is said that Shakyamuni's enlightenment lay in identifying darkness or ignorance as 
30 
the fondamental cause of the sufferings of birth, 
aging, skkness and death-as well as in expounding the way for overcoming this ignorance. 
Therefore, as long as we seek the path to 
enlightenment outside our own lives, whatever 
practices and good deeds we carry out will deviate 
from the true essence of Buddhism. Accordingly, 
Nichiren says: "Such students of Buddhism are 
condemned as non-Buddhist" (WND-1, 4). 
To Seek Enlightenment Outside 
Our Lives Is To Be Defeated by 
Fundamental Darkness 
An important point in this writing is that we as 
Nichiren Buddhists also run the risk of falling 
into non-Buddhist ways of thinking if we seek the 
Law outside of our own lives. Hence, as Nichiren 
Daishonin's disciples, we must always bear in 
mind his admonition "You must never think that 
any of the [Buddha's] teachings ... are outside 
yourself" (WND-1, 3). 
The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a 
practice for revealing the "originally inherent 
mystic truth"7 that exists in all people and achieving Buddhahood in this lifetime. It is an 
incomparably"wonderful practice" (OTT, 88), in 
the sense that it represents the means by which all 
living beings can gain enlightenment. 
If, however, we forget Nichiren's admonition to 
never seek the Law outside of us, then no matter 
how hard we practice, we will lose sight of the correct path to universal enlightenment and effectively 
wind up practicing a non-Buddhist teaching. That's 
why Nichiren is so strict on this point 
The essence of our practice is to perceive the 
true nature of our lives. To do this we must wage 
an inner struggle. If we allow ourselves to be 
defeated by the three obstacles and four devils,• 
we cannot bring forth our enlightenment. That is 

why battling the darkness or ignorance within us 
is an unavoidable part of the process of becoming 
a Buddha. In other words, whether we continuously battle our innate ignorance is the single 
most important determinant in whether we 
attain Buddhahood. As such, it is something we 
must never forget. 
By engaging in this struggle, we can reveal the 
Buddha wisdom within our lives and thereby 
confront and overcome our ignorance. But if we 
fail to undertake this struggle, ignorance will 
shroud and conceal our Buddha nature. Ignorance deepens and exacerbates the five delusive 
inclinations of greed, anger, foolishness, arrogance and doubt within us. That is what happens 
if we succumb to the erroneous view that the Law 
is outside ourselves. 
Faith for Attaining 
Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
Naturally, the Gohonzon-the object of devotion 
in Nichiren Buddhism-in itself is great beyond 
measure. Apassage from Nichikan's Six-Volume 
Writings9 that states: "Even someone who has not 
yet aroused true faith will still receive immense 
benefit through connecting with the correct 
object [ of devotion, namely, the Gohonzon]" 
(Rokkans/Jo, p. 81). 
The true lineage of faith we inherit in the Soka 
Gakkai is what opens up this infinite and boundless power of the Gohonzon. Faith as practiced by 
the Soka Gakkai entails an active struggle to manifest the Mystic Law in our lives; it also produces 
clear actual proof of benefit. When we advance 
together with the Soka Gakkai, we naturally come 
to internalize the correct practice of faith as 
taught by Nichiren Daishonin. 
Therefore, those who sincerely chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo to the Gohonzon and practice 
and participate in activities with the Soka Gakkai 
cannot fail to become Buddhas. The purpose of 
faith is to freely reaJize our full potential and shine 
in our own unique way. That's why it's important 
to keep advancing and challenging ourselves, to 
have the spirit "Iwill exert myself in my practice! Iwill deepen my faith! Iwill do my best as a member of the Soka Gakkai." This is the certain path to 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
·with this understanding, let's concretely and 
strictly apply to our daily practice Nichiren's 
admonition "If you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an 
inferior teaching (WND-1, 3). To seek the Mystic 
Law somewhere outside of us essentially amounts 
to evading responsibility for our own lives. 
Practicing Nichiren Buddhism means not 
being swayed this way and that; it means constructing a self that is solid and resolute like 
towering Mount Fuji. But if we neglect this task 
and focus our energies somewhere else, before 
" 
we're even aware of it, we can end up veering onto 
the path of externally seeking the Law. 
For e.'<ample, if we chant to the Gohonzon but 
always blame other people or our environment 
for our circwnstances, we are avoiding the challenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance. 
By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment outside of us. By chmging ourselves on a more 
profound level, we can begin to improve our situation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the 
driving force for that change. 
lt is also important that we don't fall into the 
31 

. . 
Bud' Jhahood in This Lifetime 
On Attaining 
"
1 
trap of practicing "dependent faith," where we pin 
our hopes on having our prayers answered 
through the divine or transcendent powers of 
gods or Buddhas. This is a typical example -f 
viewing the Law as outside oneself. The pro\'ts 
ch. 
10 
sional Buddhas of the pre-Lotus utta tea mgs 
readily lend themselves to this kind of faith, the 
essence of which is escapism. 
Even when they're obviously suffering, people 
of dependent faith avoid looking at their problems. They don't have the courage or make any 
actual effort to chailenge their situation. 1n such 
cases. quite frankly, faith is simply something people hide behind as they avoid draling with reality. 
Wllhout a struggle, however, we cannot dittaly 
engage the gears of our human m'Olution. 
To use the analogy of mountain climbing. if we 
just walk around the base of the mountain and 
never actually attrmpt to ascend its slopes. we'll 
never reach the-summit, no matter bow much time 
passes. If we avoid cbaUmging nm own issues, we 
can never strengthen and develop ourselves, and 
we won't be able to attain Buddbabood in this 
lifetime. 
In addition, it is important that we try to rid 
our lives of ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbelief as weJJ as grumbling and complaining The 
erroneous belief that Myoho-rcnge-kyo ( the Mys--
tic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core 
an inability to believe that all peop-ursdves 
and otbers-----posscss the Buddha nature. And this 
disbelief stems from fundamental darkness. 
In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to 
.skeptically regard the Buddha nature as "'a nice 
ideal but one that doesn't really change reality" 
.vill manifest itself as prayer that is vague and 
:1cking in conviction. If our efforts in faith arc 
alfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or 
mdamentally transform our lives. 
As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he 
says, "You must summon up deep faitli» (WNn.1 
3), if we hope to make our inherent lluddh- 
nature the basis of our lives-or as Nichiren 
terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime--
we must continue striving to deepen our faith, 
our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-rengel-yo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as 
confident and concrete prayer. 
Because our practice of faith is aimed at 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is essential that we have a solidly focused attitude when 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like trying 
to shoot an arrow: without a clear target, we won't 
draw the bow with any real force or determination. In the same way, when we replace vague 
yearnings with concrete determinations and confident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what 
WC hope to achieve. 
Grumbling and complaining are the principal 
gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbelief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find 
ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of 
ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual, 
it will act as a constant brake on our growth and 
cause us to forget about advancing and improving ourselves. We will then effectively close off our 
own potential. falling into the path of seeking the 
Law outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can 
derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control 
these tendencies and use them as a springboard 
for positive growth and development. 
Let's also strictly guard against slandering our 
fellow members. Slandering and harboring resentmalt and jealousy toward others results in denying 
their Buddha nature. The inability to believe in 
others' Buddha nature-just like not believing in 
our own-ames us to stray off course and seek 
the Law externally. Our Buddha nature is what 
fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for 
l 

ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha 
nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra, 
which teaches that aU people have the potential for 
Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly 
warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra, 
not only won't we accomplish our desire to attain 
Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up 
committing slander of the Law.11 
Also, unless we practice together united in the 
spirit of "many in body, one in mind," the great 
desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fuJfiHed. 12 
Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves 
and others is the true means for attaining Bud• 
dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the 
potential to become a Buddha. 
The Spirit of the First Three Presidents 
Pulses in the Soka Gakkai 
A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of 
the Law in each person's life is one that treasures 
the individual. It calls out to each person, encourages his or her individual human revolution and 
seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the 
appearance of one person after another embracing 
faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily 
emerging from the earth to propagate the Law, and 
the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu. n 
This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first 
three presidents-Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei 
Toda and myself-have steadfastly followed. 
That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phenomenal development and why our kosen-rufu 
movement has spread throughout the entire world. 
In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the 
Law as existing outside one's own life tend to be 
authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and 
repress people. They are prone to emphasizing rit· 
uals or clerical authority, while their followers 
passively seek to assuage their anxieties through 
dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, taking advantage of the fact that one of human beings' 
greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes 
after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have 
come to function almost exclusively as purveyors 
of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, 
devolving into what is known as "funeral Buddhism." They offer no philosophy that empowers 
people or enables them to live better lives. 
The Soka Gakkai 's founder, President 
Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a 
"teaching for transforming one's life." To believe 
that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo exists 
within us is to have the confidence that we will 
definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood 
in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working 
for kosen-ru.fu through sharing Nichiren Buddhism based on the conviction that it holds the 
key to happiness for both ourselves and others. 
This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and 
the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the 
first three presidents' spirit of the oneness of 
mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this 
most difficult of challenges-that of awakening 
people to the Law within. 
President Toda used to say, "You should 
resolve, 'Iam Myoho-renge-k.-yo!"' The Mystic 
law is the "highly effective medicine" ( Tire Lotus 
Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 269) 
that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also 
33 

On Attaining Buddhahood ln This Lifetime 
trap of practicing "dependent fuith:' where we pin 
our hopes on having our prayers answered 
through the divine or transcendent powers of 
gods or Buddhas. This is a typical example of 
viewing the Law as outside oneself. The provisional Buddhas of the pre--Lotus Sutra tcachings10 
readily lend themselves to this kind of faith, the 
essence of which is escapism. 
says, (\You must summon up deep failh" (WND-l, 
3) if we hope to make our inherent Buddha 
' 
. 
1. 
as Nichiren 
nature the baSIS of our 1vcs-or • 
terms it to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime-
' 
. 
. . 
t d epen our faith, 
we must continue stnvmg o c 
our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-renge· 
k.')'O. And as our faith deepens, it will manifeSt as 
confident and concrete prayer. 
Even when they're ob,iously suffering, people 
of dependent faith avoid looking at their problems. They don't haYe the courage or make any 
actual effort to challenge their situation. ln such 
cases, quite frankly, faith is simply something people hide behind as they avoid dealing v.-ith reality. 
Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly 
engage the gem of our human revolution. 
To wt 1hc analogy of mountain climbing, if we 
just walk around 1llle base of the mountain and 
never aaua1ly IUm1pt to ascend its slopes, we'll 
DN:l'ieach themmrnit, TIO matter bow much time 
passes. If we avoid maUenging our own issues, we 
can nm:I' s1mlgthen 111d develop ourselves, and 
we won't be able to attain Buddhahood in this 
lifetime. 
Because our practice of faith is aimed at 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is essen· 
tial that we have a solidly focused attitude w-en 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like tryin- 
to shoot an arrow: without a dear target, we wont 
draw the bow with any real force or determina· 
tion. In the same way, when we replace vague 
yearnings with concrete determinations and confident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what 
we hope to achieve. 
Grumbling and complaining are the principal 
gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe· 
lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find 
ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of 
ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual, 
it will act as a constant brake on our growth and 
cause us to forget about advancing and improv· 
ing ourselves. We will then effectively dose off our 
own potential, falling into the path of seeking the 
Law outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can 
derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control 
these tendencies and use them as a springboard 
for positive growth and development. 
In addition. it is important that we try to rid 
our lives of ambiguous. elusive doubt and disbelief as well as grumbling and complaining. The 
erroneous belief that Myobo-renge•kyo ( the Mystic Law) aists outside of our lives bas at its core 
an inability to believe that all people--Ourselves 
and others-possess the Buddha nature. And this 
disbelief stems from fundamental darknt.ssln tams of attitude in faith, this tendency to 
skeptically regard the Buddha nature as •a Diet 
ideal but one that doesn't really change reality" 
will manifest iuelf as prayer that is vague and 
lacking in conviction. If our efforts in faith are 
halfhearted. we cannot change our attitude or 
fundamentally transform our lives. 
As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he 
32 
Let's also strictly guard against slandering our 
fellow members. Slandering and harboring resentment and jealousy toward others results in denying 
their Buddha nature. The inability to believe in 
others' Buddha nature-just like not believing in 
our own-causes us to stray off course and seek 
the Law externally. Our Buddha nature is what 
fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for 

ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha 
nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra, 
which teaches that all people have the potential for 
Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly 
warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra, 
not only won't we accomplish our desire to attain 
Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up 
committing slander of the Law.11 
Also, unless we practice together united in the 
spirit of "many in body, one in mind," the great 
desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.'2 
Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves 
and others is the true means for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the 
potential to become a Buddha. 
The Spirit of the First Three Presidents 
Pulses in the Soka Gakkai 
A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of 
the Law in each person's life is one that treasures 
the individual. It calls out to each person, encourages his or her individual human revolution and 
seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the 
appearance of one person after another embracing 
faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily 
emerging from the earth to propagate the Law, and 
the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.13 
This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first 
three presidents-Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei 
Toda and myself- have steadfastly followed. 
That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phenomenal development and why our kosen-rufu 
movement has spread throughout the entire world. 
In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the 
Law as existing outside one's own life tend to be 
authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and 
repress people. They are prone to emphasizing rituals or clerical authority, while their followers 
passively seek to assuage their anxieties through 
dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, taking advantage of the fact that one of human beings' 
greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes 
after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan ha-ve 
come to function almost exclusively as purveyors 
of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, 
devolving into what is known as "funeral Buddhism." They offer no philosophy that empowers 
people or enables them to live better lives. 
The Soka Gakkai's founder, President 
Ma.kiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a 
"teaching for transforming one's life." To believe 
that the Mystic Law of -lyoho-renge-k-yo exists 
within us is to have the confidence that we will 
definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood 
in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working 
for kosen-rufu through sharing Nichiren Buddhism based on the conviction that it bolds the 
key to happiness for both ourselves and others. 
This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and 
the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the 
first three presidents' spirit of the oneness of 
mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this 
most difficult of challenges-that of awakening 
people to the law within. 
President Toda used to say, "You should 
resolve, 'Iam Myoho-renge-kyo!''' The Mystic 
law is the "highly effective medicine" (The Lotus 
Sutra and Its Oper1ing and Closing Sutras, p. 269) 
that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also 
33 

, 
On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
b . 
ood 
the great treasure storehouse that rmgs S 
' 
. 'de cowardice 
accord with these words, lets caSt aSI. 
c 
t attribute. 
fortune and happiness to all. The important thh- 
is to live out our lives based on and completely m 
sync with the Law; it is to imbue and solidify our 
lives with the Mystic Law. 
and make courage our iore1-1os 
. ak through 
People of courageous faith can bi e 
. 
to 
d delus1on 
the dark clouds of fear, ignorance an 
. 
nd 
. 
. Lto shine a 
Our daily realities are filled with an endless 
succession of problems. But ·with the firm belief 
that our lives are -h•oho-renge-\..')'o, we sbould 
strive to boldly challenge everything with the 
unwavering conviction that ·we can overcome all 
hardships and become happy without fail. \\Then 
we maintain deep faith based on the foundation 
that •1 am Myoho-renge-1--yo," we can take on any 
problem with comagc. The key to victory in life 
lies in whether we can bring forth courage. Not a 
shrinking timidity but a challenging courage--
this is what 'WC need to have! 
bring the sun of the Mystic aw 
the lotus of 
beautiful flowers of Myoho-rengethe Mystic Law-to bloom in their lives._ 
to 
• 
gwdance 
President Toda gave the following 
. 
r-
. the p1onee 
young women's division members m 
Jd take 
. 
t· "You shou 
mg days of our movemen · 
ddha of 
pride in possessing the same life as the Bu_ . you 
•c 
·th 
ble spirit. 
the Latter Day. Win in lhe w1 
a no 
,, 
d 
• 
urselves. 
lm:spcctive of the obstacles we may encounter 
in the course of our practice, we must not retreat 
a single stq>. We must not be alarmed or startled 
by them. The power of the Mystic Law (Myohorenge-k}o} can triumph over anything. To become 
deeply confident of 1his is most importanL 
Faring hardships and bemoaning and resenting our environment are to believe that the Law is 
outside our own lives. So is losing confidence in 
our ability to overcome our circumstances and 
turning to others in the hope that they will save 
us. or blaming others for our problems. or giving 
in to bopdessnCIS and resignation. 
Wbc,, diffirnlties be&et us. no matter how trying they may be, we must dearly see them for the 
obstacles or devilish functions they are and battle 
against them without retreating. l1us is the way 
of life of those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
and dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law. 
Nichircn Daishonin says. "'[My] disciples cannot 
accomplish anything if they are c.owardly" ("The 
Teaching. Practice, and Proof," WND-1, 481). ln 
34 
must absolutely never eprec1ate yo 
. 
•on 
h real1zatt 
Nichiren Buddhism starts from t e 
ahood 
. 
di· 
f Buddh 
that the supreme life-con tion ° 
it 
. 
th t makes 
exists in each of us. It is a teachmg 
a 
. er 
. 
. 
c ndest inn 
Possible for us to achieve the pro1ou 
d 
. 
fun atransformation-a transformation of our 
. 0 
mental attitude or mind-set. That's why Nichife f 
emphasizes the importance of our minds, 
0 
what's in our hearts. 
dha's 
He writes: "Whether you chant the Bud 
d 
name. recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers an 
incense, all your virtuous acts will implant bene-ts 
and roots of goodness in your life. With this conviction you should strive in faith" (WND-1, 4). All our 
efforts in faith-including our practice of reciting 
the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo each morning and evening, as well as all of our 
various Soka Gakkai activities-are virtuous acts 
that "implant benefits and roots of goodness" in 
our lives. Those who advance with this deep awareness will be true victors who travel the direct path 
to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
Always upholding the great philosophy 
embodied in Nichiren's words "It is the heart that 
is important" (WND-1 l0OO) 1 
'f 
. 
. 
. 
, 
, et us lead magni -
1cent, v1ctonous lives! 
0 

I. Miao-lo, T/1e /\111wtntio11s 011 "Great C<mce11trntion and /might." 
2. As used here, "the Buddha's name- denotes Nam-myoho-rcnge-kyo. 
3. Three meanings of mycr. In "The Daimoku of the Lotus Sutra," 
Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Myo means to be fully endowed, 
which In turn has the meaning of'perfcct and foll'" (WND- 1, 146); 
"The character myo means to open" (WND-1, 1'15); and "Myo 
means to revive, that is, to return to life" (WND-1, 149). 
4. The unchanging nature inherent in all things and phenomena. 
5. The ten directions refers to the entire universe, all physic•l space. 
Specifically, the ten directions are the eight directions of the companorth, south, east, west, northwest, northeast, southeast and 
so-thwest-plus up and down. Buddhist scriptures refer to the 
existence of Buddha lands in aU directions throughout the uni· 
verse, each with its own Buddha. The expression the Buddhns of tl1t 
te11 directioru in the sutras indicates these Buddhas. The phrase ten 
directio11s often appears with the phrase three existences, meaning 
past, present and future existences. "The Buddhas of the ten directions and three existences" thus means all Buddhas throughout 
space and time. 
6. Substituting faith for wisdom: The principle that faith is the true 
cause for gaining supreme wisdom, and faith alone leads to 
enlightenment. 
7. Originally inherent mystic truth: The fundamental Law, Mystic 
Law or Buddha nature with which all life is originally endowed. 
8. Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that 
appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. 
9. Nichikan was the twenty-sixth chief priest of Taiseki-ji, the head 
temple of the Nikko school (also known as the Fuji school). He is 
revered as the restorer of Nichiren's teachings because he worked to 
clarify their true meaning. During the four centuries after Nichiren 
Daishonin's death, a number of errors and misconceptions had 
arisen aJ his follower. !plit inro m .. ny Khools. NichikJn worked 
tirelruly to clarify the true meaning of Nichircn's teachings- He 
completed cxegc,es on Nichirm', five major writings and other 
work$. and authored The Six-Volume Wrltinp. which distinguishes 
the correct interpretation, of Nichiren's tai:hings from mideading 
ones. 
10. The provisionJI tc-Jchings that pre«ded the Lorus Sutra do not 
teach thac the world of Buddhahood aist.• in all -pie, and 
instead dc:Kri- Buddhas ;u idcJ.!ized •nd ruperior brings. The 
Pure Land (Ncmbursu) r..achin- forcxamplc,c:cplain that instead 
of relying on ont's own efforu. one should cxclU5ivtly -nd on 
salvation through such a BudJh.-namely. Amid.I. 
11. In "The Fourteen Slanders,W Nichirm writtS: -rhctt 3 a differt'.llCc 
if one chanu the d•imoku while :Jding ag;iinsr the intmt of this 
sutra ... Alw;iys remember that bdit'Vt'fS in tM Lorus Sutra should 
absolutely be the la.st ro ab- one another. All those who keep fuith 
in the Lotm Sutra arc m- certainly Buddhu. and one who sl.mdcrs a Buddha commits• grave offense" (WND-1. 756). 
12. ln "The Heritage of the L'lrimatc Law of Llfc.• N',chircn writ,s: "All 
disciples and lay supportt'Dof Nichirm should -t -mmyoho-rcnge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but one in -ind. 
transcending all cliffermu:s among them- 10 bccorn< as tn5eparablc as fish and the water in which they swim. This sp1ri1wl 
bond is thc basis for the universal ttan.Smis.sion of w ultim:lte L,w 
of life and death. H=in Ii- the - 
goal of N'ichircn'.s propagation. \\-'hen you are so united. evm the great desire for widespread 
propagation c;in be fuJfilte<nWND-1,217). 
13. In "The True Aspect of All Phaiomma; :-:ichiren writes: ·At first 
only Nichirrn chanted Nam-myoho-rmge-kyo. but then rwo. 
three. and a hundred followed. chanting and teaching othcs. Propagation will unfold this way in the future as well. Doo:s this not 
signify'cmerging from the earth'?" (\-D-1. 385). 
35 

• 
Key Points: 
The Essence cf Chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
The Law contained in the practice -0f chanting 
spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. 'But even the 
power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest 
in .a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the 
inner darkness that prevents us from believing in 
the Mystic Law and sta)ing focused on our own 
Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of 
chanting enables us to break through this darkness 
and \'ibrantly bring fonh our Buddhahood. Battling our fundamental darkness-this inner 
struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myohorcnge-l.1'0- (p. 29) 
The Heart of Buddhism 
If we seek. enlightenment outside of us, we are not 
pursuing the path of ""observing one's mind," 
-wbicb enables us to ovcrc.ome the fundamental evil 
of ignorance or darkness. 1n that case, all our 
efforts and good deeds to attain enlightenment will 
be lacking the vital ingredient; they will be every 
bit as futile as counting a neighbor's vast riches. 
Moreover. because none of these efforts will help 
us eradicate our ignoranc:c. they will only become 
•an endless, painful austcity." This battle against 
ignorance is the bean of Buddhism. (p. 30) 
The Driving Force for 
Our Transformation 
Confident and Concrete Prayer 
. 
kyo (the 
The erroneous behcf that Myoho-rcnge-
. 
Mystic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its 
core an inability to believe that all people-ourselves and others-possess the Buddha nature. 
And this disbelief stems from fundamental darkness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to 
" nice 
skeptically regard the Buddha nature as a 
. 
I. '' will 
ideal but one that doesn't really change rea ity 
. 
manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking 10 
conviction. lf our efforts in faith are halfhearted, 
we cannot change our attitude or fundamentall.y 
transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this 
writing when he says. "You must summon up deep 
faith" (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inher· 
ent Buddha nature the basis of our lives--<>r as 
Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this 
lifetime-we must continue striving to deepen our 
faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho· 
reoge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will 
manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43) 
Overcoming Grumbling 
and Complaining 
If we cb.a.nt to the Gohonz.on but always blame 
other people or our environment for our circumstances, we are avoiding the challenge of tackling 
our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we 
are seeking enlightenment outside of us. By changing ounclves on a more profound level that we 
can begin to improve our situation. Chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that 
change. (p. 31) 
Grumbling and complaining are the principal 
gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbelie( Even if we know it is wrong, we may find 
ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of 
ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual, 
it will act as a constant brake on our growth and 
cause us to forget about advancing and improving 
ourselves. We will then effectively close off our own 
potential, falling into the path of seeking the Law 
outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to 
stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive 
from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these 
tendencies and use them as a springboard for positive growth and development. (p. 32) 
36 
-! • , ; - .. , ,. • 
, .. ' 
.. 
1s Iet1me 
If 
Ic 
[s] 
\' ··; 
... 
,,,-. 
. 
. 
" 
.. ' 
Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
With a "Brave and Vigorous" Spirit-
Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge 
The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas' emancipation 
in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities 
of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It 
also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also 
impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands. 
pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of 
our minds. 
It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is 
called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This 
is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. Amind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, 
reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature} and the 
true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day 
and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo. (kOn Attaining BuddhJ.hood ii\ Thi- Life1imt." The \\'ri1i11gs vf N1,hir-11 D<li.,lii,11i1- ,ol. I. p. -1) 
37 

[s} 
Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
With a "Brave and Vigorousn Spirit-
Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge 
:he Vimalalcirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas' emancipation 
lil the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities 
of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It 
-so states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also 
impure, hut if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands, 
pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of 
our minds. 
It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is 
called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This 
is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. Amind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a dear mirror, 
reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the 
true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day 
and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo, ("On Attaining Buddh,ihoo,l in This Lif,·tim-," "/'/,,. \-"ri1i11i:s of Nichirc'II D11isho11i11, vol. I, p. 4) 
ct 
J 
. .,,, ' ..-u'-'; 
.· ..,..: 
7"" r..9'- \:r: 
·-----.... -- ..... -i 
37 
l
' ,,
' 
I I 

I ! 
on Attaining 'Buddhahood In This Lifetime 
Those 'Whose hearts shine with a <lOINlllt• 
ment to truth and justice never lose 
hope, Mn amid lhegreatatlmd.wp or 
dilliculty. Rather, they senie u a bright bea<nn 
illuminating the dadmess of people's sufering, 
. 
the entities of 
finds that ordinary beings are 
. 
f b' th 
th 
ff enngs o ir 
enlightenment, and that e su 
imparting inspiration.- and a,urage. 
When we change, die \tt'Orld changes. The 
key to all change is in our inner transformation-a change in our beans and minds. This is 
human m'Olution. We all have the power to 
change. When we reali7.e this truth of life, we 
can bring forth 1hat power anywhere. anytime 
and in any situation. 
Nichiren 'Rnddbism, based on the transformative principles of the lmus Sutra, bas made 
this great path of inner change available to 
all people, with the maoting of Nam-myohorenge-kyo as its oore practice. 
This time, rn discuss the passage in which 
Nichiren Daishonin ou1lincs the basic attitude 
and approach to our fundamental practice of 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
Changing Ourselves 
and Changing the Land 
• 
,,2 (WND-1, 4). 
and death are nirvana 
. • of enlight-
-Ordinary beings are the enuues 
. . 
. d m for atta1nmg 
cnment" means that the w1s o 
. fests in the 
Buddhahood (enlightenment) ma;i in earthly 
,:.- of ordinary people steepe 
. h d 
uv""' 
. 
f birt an 
desires. Similarly, "the suff enngs oB ddha life-
. 
,, 
s that the u 
death are rurvana mean 
ilrt ( nirvana) 
state of true peace and tranqu 1 y 
le tor-
___ :&-. .. in the lives of ordinary peop 
h 
IWIWl"'-'..., 
• h and deat • 
mcnted by the suffer-gs of birt ddhas and 
Here, Nichiren explains that :: an insurordinary people are not separate 
Y 
• 
h' g setung 
mountable divide; that the o-ly t -minds of 
them apart is the difference m the 
ordinary beings." 
fr m the 
N"Khiren also cites the passage 
o 
. 
h difference 
Vima)a1drti Sutra that explains t e 
hi assagebetween pure and impure lands. Ts P . 
f 
which N.chir 
wnrnarizes as "If the minds o 
1 
en s 
. 
d . also 
living beings are impure, their lan 
is 
. 
. 
so is their 
impure but if their minds are pure, 
' 
ate 
land"'--clarifies that there are not two separ 
. 
b 
pure and 
lands; the only difference etween 
. 
,, 
impure lands is "the good or evil of our mmds. 
As Ihave already touched on at length, the 
entirety of Buddhism exists within our own 
lives. And the key to attaining Buddhahood-the 
ultimate transformation of our life-state-also 
lies in a change in our hearts, or minds. 
The view shown here is one in which tbe pure 
land does not exist in some otherworldly realm 
but in the real world, and is achieved by people 
changing themselves inside. This is a dynamic 
and practical view of the pure land, based on 
the idea of "to purify Buddha lands" expounded 
in the Lotus Sutra (The Lotus Sutra and Its 
Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 117), 
To convey this point, Nichiren Daishonin 
here summarizes a point from the V1Inalakirti 
Sutra:1 "When one seeks the Buddhas' emancipation in the minds of ordinary beings, one 
38 
The Vunalakirti Sutra passage cited by Nichiren is from the "Inquiring about the Illness," 

or fifth, chapter Th. 
h 
exch 
b 
· 
ts c apter describes the 
ange etween v· 
laki • 
Buddhist la 
. 
una 
rt1, an outstanding 
bodh" 
Ybeliever and practitioner of the 
1sattva w 
h 
h 
shri 
Of 
ay w Oas fallen ill, and Manju-
, ne o Shakya 
., l 
. 
is v· • . 
munt s eadmg disciples who 
1s1ting him Wh 
• 
illness v· 
· 
en asked the cause of his 
, 1mal ki · 
beings are . a rti replies, "Because all living 
well-kno sick, therefore Iam sick."• This is a 
fund 
wn passage that succinctly reveals the 
amental hodh· 
.. 
othe , 
isattva spmt of taking on 
r_s sufferings as one's own. 
V1malakirt· 
choo 
1 goes on to say that bodhisattvas 
se to be b 
. . 
. 
by del . 
orn among hvmg bemgs afflicted 
us1on and t 
h 
. 
birth 
Os are m the sufferings of 
and death· 
those li . 
m order to instruct and guide 
vmg b · 
over b dh" 
emgs to enlightenment. More-
, 
0 
1sattv 
swayed b su 
-s are never overwhelmed or 
lished 
y 
ffenng, because they have estab-
Th: pure state of enlightenment within.
5 
Sut 
_s, the passages from the Vimalakirti 
ra cited b N" 
. 
Buddh 
Yichiren clarify the meaning of 
ahoodandth 
Po• 
e pure land from the standint of a b dh" 
amid th 
-. isattva practitioner fighting 
fo 
e realities of daily life. Nichiren, therere, states in 
1 . 
" 
is all 
cone us1on, When deluded, one 
c 
ed an 
d" 
. 
ened 
. or mary bemg, but when enlight-
, one is called a Buddha" (WND-1, 4). In 
other wo d 
h 
. 
rs, t e difference between ordinary 
people and Bddh 
· 
· 
d"ffi 
u 
as 1s nothmg more than the 
. 1 erence between delusion and enlightenm-nt 
m ordinary 
l , 
. 
peop e s mmds. How, then, can we 
transform d l 
• 
. 
. 
e us1on mto enlightenment? 
In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains 
that when people's hearts change the land or 
-heir external environment can al-o change. At 
its foundation is a transformation from delusion to enlightenment. 
As discussed earlier, what makes this transformation possible is the practice of chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual 
level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can 
overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the 
root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood 
with which we are originally endowed. 
Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe 
this fundamental potential for change, saying, 
"This is similar to a tarnjshed mirror that will 
shine like a jewel when polished" (WND-1, 4). 
In this way, he conveys that the practice of 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo--the means 
for defeating our inner darkness--serves to 
"polish" our lives. 
All living beings are inherently entities of the 
Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Buddhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of 
the Mystic Law within us freely and without hindrance, whenever and in whatever form it is 
needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life 
to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even 
though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we 
cannot bring forth the power of that La·w if our 
lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a 
benighted state, we are like a "tarnished mirror" 
that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing 
the tarnished mirror of our lives. 
The Path for Polishing our Lives: 
( 1) Brave Challenge 
Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chanting as a practice for polishing our lives: "Amind 
now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when 
polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, 
reflecting the essential nature of phenomena 
[i.e., the Dharma nature1 and the true aspect of 
39 
VI 

-
---------B-u-dd-l1-a-ho-o-d-i-n !!Th-ls-L-if-et:,::im:,::e:..--------
on AttaananQ 
-
reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish 
your mirror day and night. How should you 
polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo" (WND-1, 4). 
The mirror simile here is truly ingenious. 
The mirror being endowed with the property 
of reflection corresponds to our lives being 
endowed with the mystic truth. But if a mirror is 
not polished, it will naturally become clouded. 
Since mirrors in Nichiren's day were typically 
made of bronze, they would readily tarnish. Atarnished mirror could not fulfill its original 
function, so it bad to be polished regularly. 
Similarly, if our lives are neglected and left 
uncultivated, they will be shrouded in ignorance. 
The act of polishing is indispemable for 
restoring the mirror's innate property. Moreover, just polishing a mirror once is not 
enough. We have to keep polishing it if we wish 
it to retain its reflective property. As tbia 
metaphor aptly attests, our practice of chanting 
40 
SGI President Ikeda 
welcomes U.N. 
Under-Secretary-General 
Anwarul K. Chowdhury at 
the Makiguchi Memorial Hall 
in Tokyo, August 30, 2006. 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to polish 
our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of 
ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our 
enlightened Dharma nature. 
This practice of polishing our lives may be 
seen as having two aspects. One is to "arouse 
deep faith," as Nichiren exhorts (WND-1, 4). 
This could also be articulated as summoning 
the fighting spirit to battle our inner darkness. 
The other aspect is to continue making steadfast efforts, in accord with Nichiren's 
admonition that we should "diligently polish 
our mirror day and night" (see WND-1, 4). 
These two points echo the two aspects of 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo identified 
by Nkbilcan, a seventeenth-century restorer of 
Nicbiren Buddhism, based on the phrase in 
the "Expedient Means" chapter of the Lotus 
Sutra., "exert oneself bravely and vigorously" 
(tee LSOC, 56; Jpn yumyo shojin). Nichikan 
apJaiJ,, that "bravely and vigorously' (ymnyo) 

geously bringing forth the power 
9 ,oura 
mean 
nfidence, in chanting Nam-myoho-
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a crucial requirement 
for attaining Buddhahood. 
f (; ith or co 
o a ' 
while "exert oneself" (shojin) means 
renge·!<>"'' incere1y and consistently in the 
11gagtn8 s 
Nichiren writes: "Suffer what there is to suffer, enjoy what there is to enjoy. Regard both 
suffering and joy as facts of life, and continue 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, no matter 
what happens. How couJd this be anything other 
e 
. 
f chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.
6 
racuce o 
P In chanting Nam-_myoh--renge-kyo, the 
. 
ortant thing 1s having the challengfu- tmP 
. 
. 
· ·t to act with courage. This could be 
10g spin 
"bed as arousing deep faith from the 
desert 
. 
. 
most reaches of our lives in accord with 
mner 
Nichiren's words, firmly believing that we can 
summon forth the mystic truth within us, 
manifest our inherent Buddhahood and 
attain enlightenment in this lifetime without 
fail. It also means directly taking on the three 
obstacles and four devils that seek to obstruct 
us from chanting Narn-myoho-renge-kyo. We 
need to have a fearless, tireless and unremitting challenging spirit to confront and 
overcome the diverse array of obstacles that 
rise up to assail us. For it is precisely by challenging, battling and defeating ignorance that 
we can polish our lives. 
The Path for Polishing Our Lives: 
(2) Continuing 
Next, continuing is vital. It is absolutely essential 
for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
Nichiren Daishonin says: "To accept is easy; to 
continue is difficult. But Buddhahood lies in 
continuing faith" ("The Difficulty of Sustaining 
Failb,"WND-1, 471). In "On Attaining Buddha-
-ood in This Lifetime,» we see the paramount 
importance of continuing from Nichiren•s 
repeated emphasis on the need to practice "day 
a-d _night,, and "diligently" (WND-1, 4). Maintaining an unflagging practice of chanting 
than the boundJess joy of the Law?" ("Happiness 
in This World," WND-1, 681). We must continue 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo during times 
of both suffering and joy. The emphasis here is 
on the word continue, and it is key that we do so 
throughout "both suffering and joy." \Vhen confronted with suffering, we must not retreat. \.Ve 
should "suffer what there is to suffer." This is neither resignation nor escapism. \Ve need to fi.- 
our gaze unflinchingly on reality and bravely 
challenge it based on chanting Nam-myohorenge-kyo. Nichiren is e.-laining that this is the 
correct attitude for practitioners of the -fystic 
Law. Faith in Nichiren Buddhism is constantly 
directed toward transforming reality. 
Of course, such a state of life is not gained 
overnighL But if we steadfastly and diligently 
continue making efforts to polish ourselves day 
in and day out. month after month, year after 
year, we will naturally and surely come to attain 
it. mirroring the words of the sutra passage 
"This cluster of unsurpassed jewels / has come 
to us unsought" (LSOC, 12-1).' 
Ne.xt. "enjoy what there is to enjo- (\VND-1, 
681), can be taken to mean that when we're e.-q,eriencing joy, we should remember to have 
gratitude and make even greater efforts to chant 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, aiming toward the ultimate goal of attaining Budd.hahood in this 
lifetime. Deepening our seeking spirit in fuith is 
much more difficult in good times than in bad, 
because in good times it is easy to grow lax and 
41 

on Attaining Buddltahood In This Lifetime 
self-satisfied. Rather than being somrone who is 
strong in advmity but weak when things are 
going well, we should seek to construct the kind 
of invincible faith that allows us to "regard both 
suffering and joy as facts oflife" (WND-1, 681 ). 
an unshakable state of life that is one with the 
Dharma nature (namely, the life-state of Buddhahood). This is because if we "slacken in ottr 
resolve even a bit" (see WND-1, 997), as Nichiren ,mtes, we will become vulnerable to life's 
Such strong faith is forged through our practice as Soka Gakkai members striving to adueve 
the lofty goal of kosen-rufu and our own enlightenment in this existence. Above all, chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge--lq'O-the process by which 
we •diligently polish our minor day and night" 
(sec W?\1D-1, 4)--strengthens our lives in the 
same ·way that a magnifirent sword is forged and 
tempered. The crux here lies in chanting with the 
spirit to challenge in times of suffering, and 
chanting with appreciation in times of joy. 
negative influences. 
Also, when we exert ourselves in faith, the 
three obstacles and four devils inevitably arise. 
It is by defeating them that we can establish the 
life-state of Buddhahood. When we polish our 
lives on the most fundamental level through 
the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo, we can deepen, strengthen and broaden 
ourselves spiritually without limit. 
"Continuing" is another way of saying "not 
regressing." Throughout the pages of Nichiren's 
writings, we can sec his emphasis on never 
regressing or backsliding in faith. To cite but a 
few passages, Nidriren writes: "One . . . who 
chants the daimoku, is the Th.us Come One's 
emissary. Also, one who perseveres through 
great persecutions and embraces the sutra from 
heg.inning to end is the Thus C.Ome One's emissary" ("The Farther the Source. the Longer the 
Stream,• WNO· 1, 942); "Strengthen your faith 
day by day and month after month. Should you 
slackm in your resolve even a bit, devils will 
take ac1vantage• (-00 Persecution Befalling the 
5age,•WNJ>.1, 997); and "'Carry through with 
your faith in the Lotus Sutra. You cannot strike 
fire from 8int if you stop halfway" ("Earthly 
Desires.Arr Eolighrenrneot:WND•l, 319). 
"Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
Is a Diligent Practice" 
Nichiren Daishonin strove to share the supreme 
inner state of attaining Buddhahood in this 
lifetime with all his followers-and indeed all 
humankind. 
Without a battle to conquer ignorance or 
darknes1, we cannot manifest the essential 
nature of phenomena, or Dbanna nature. And 
unless we continue to wage this battle through 
exerting ourselves in faith, we cannot construct 
The true greatness of the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it enables 
each person to actually manifest the same 
life-state as the Buddha and lead an existence 
of unsurpassed depth and meaning. This is 
clearly indicated in the following well-known 
passage from The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings: "If in a single moment of life we 
exhaust the pains and trials of millions of 
kalpas, then instant after instant there will arise 
in us the three Buddha bodies• with which we 
are eternally endowed. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
is just such a 'diligent' practice" (p. 214). 
Ever since our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei Toda, explained this passage to m 
. 
e 
m my youth, Ihave made it the personal 
42 

,----------------------------------"
motto by which Ihave lived my life. In all my 
struggles, Ihave borne these words ever in mind. 
The 
11Emerging from the Earth" chapter 
of the Lotus Sutra describes countless 
bodhisattvas appearing from out of the 
ground-the emergence of the Bodhisattvas of 
the Earth. It explains that they have been 
dwelling in the empty space underneath the 
saha world and seeking the Buddha way with 
conStant diligence (see LSOC, 259). The above 
quote from The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teach · 
l 'fi 
. 
. . 
mgs c an 1es from the standpoint of 
Nichuen Buddhism the nature of their diligence or tireless exertion. 
The essence of Nichiren Buddhism is that 
those who 
th 
. 
exert 
emselves assiduously to seek 
the Buddha way automatically manifest the 
life-State of the Buddha eternally endowed with 
the three bodies-in other words, they bring 
forth their inherent Buddhahood. 
When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as if 
to concentrate in a single moment the arduous 
ex:rtions of incalculable eons-"exhausting the 
pains and trials of millions of kalpas,, (see OTI, 
214)-then the life-state of the Buddha eternally endowed with the three bodies (namely, our 
Buddhahood) appears within us instant after 
instant. 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice. 
Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing 
to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires 
constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering 
single-mindedly and consistently in this practice 
will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this 
lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent 
Buddhnhood-the Buddha eternally endowed 
with the three bodies-wells forth in the form 
of inexhaustible courage, perseverance, joy, 
wisdom and compassion. 
Praying for Brave and 
Vigorous Youth To Appear 
Exerting oneself means doing so bravely and 
vigorously. Without courage and vigor. there is 
no true exertion. The first Soka Gak.kai president, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, also led a life of 
brave and vigorous endeavor. He once said to 
young people: "Exert yourselves bravely and 
vigorously! Buddhism means taking action; it 
means constantly striving. Even at my age, 
that's what I'm doi.ng." 
President Toda also remarked to youth, 
"Youth who wish for the happiness of humanity 
should first themselves seek the essence of this 
lofty philosophy of human revolution. They 
should e..xert themselves bravely and vigorously 
to fight and triumph over all manifestations of 
the three powerful enemies and the three 
obstacles and four devils." 
My sentiments are e.-cactly the same. Ichant 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ardently for brave and 
vigorous disciples, brave and vigorous youth, to 
appear throughout the world. Iam wholeheartedly chanting for this every day. E.-certing oneself 
bravely and vigorously is truly the hallmark of 
the Soka Gakkai's mentor-disciple spiriL 
The practice of chanting Nam-rnyohorenge-kyo is the driving force for progress, 
the driving force for victory. Every challenge 
should begin with chanting Nam-myohorenge-kyo. No one is a match for those who 
steadfastly chant. 
Diligently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
morning and evening, let us thoroughly polish 
ourselves inside and construct lives in which we 
win victory after victory. 
0 
43 

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
1. \runabJdrti Sutra: A Mahayana sutra arout \limalakirti. a "'fflth)' -nd 
prominmt ciriun of the city ofVaishali at the time ofShat..1'lm11nt. In 
the sutra. \'imalakirti "'f'mt!IIS the iJnl Mahayana lay N'ht'\"1', The 
Sanskrit original of this sutra is 1101 cnant, but there arc thrtt Chi.-
translations., indudinfi one by Kumaraji\-a, whkh i- the most rorular 
'l'fflion and the ,.'Ori. u.-· rtferml to ,.,i,m th- title is mtntionro. 
2. Here. Nichircn Daishonin summarins pa- from the Vimalakirti 
Sutra and the Great TMcr T'icn-fai', rmn-n--e to it. "Inquiring 
About the m,_"the fifth d\artcr ofthesutra.rontains the follo,,-ng 
=han- "'And ht,,.· is the emancipation of the Buddhas to l,e 50ught1' 
asl,;cd l\tanjushri. 'It - - t,e --ht in the minds .•• of an li\-ng 
brings.' rcpliNI \'imalakirti." TIit \'i>Mlol-irti Suma. tnM. by Bunon 
Watson from the Chineoe ,<cr.QOn b)· J:umaraiiva <Ne--York: Columbia 
Uni,ttsity Press. l99i), p. 66. 
ln his Grt<1r Cm,anrnarion tlnd l1t.<igl,t. T'icn-t'ai ,.-ritcs: "'.>,.::cording 
to the \ r unalalirti Sutra. the cman.:ipation of the Thus Come One 
mould be solJSht in the minds of li,-ing beings. Bcause living bci.ngs 
art entities of cnlignmment. it is not something to be obtained. 
Because Ithe birth and death of] livin& brin- art nin-ana, [birth and 
death Iare not cxtin-iQled. Emancipation amead)• cxiS1s in the heart 
of one and the hearu of all. as do all phenomena." 
3. This =mary is based on the pusasc. -'hen the mind is pure, the 
Buddha bnd .. ,11 be pure." Tht li'imaJal.mi Sumi. p. 29. 
4. \ runaWcirti ays:-&causeall ln,jng beings art sick. thcrdorc 1 am sick. 
If all m-ing beings arc - 
of sid:ncss, then my sickness .. -ill be 
mended. \\'hf. 8eause the bodhi'31M for the sal:r of ln-ing bcings 
cnlt'rs tht l'l'alm of hirth tnJ d-nth, And ))('cnuse he is Ill 1 
l,irth and d<"Rth ht suffi.-rs illncs.<. lfliving beings ct1n 8111 
1 
'1c tcnlrll of 
11 re ensc - 
illn-', then the ho..lhis.111\18 will Ill) longer be m.· n,c v· 
l\lln 
S11rm. f'. 6-. 
'"'01•1lirr1 
-- The Vimalnlirti S11tn1, p. 65ff. 
i.. In "Interpreting the Tei11\astd up,m Its EMcntial Meaning• 
. 
I , . . 
N'·L 'k 
. 
' a treatise of 
'ThtSt,-.\N11111t \nrm- iu,1 an 1vntcs: "You should und 
. 
, 
crstnnd th t 
'to cxcn OOC5('1fbm-cly and 11goruusly (sec I.SOC, 56· ))>n 
a 
' 
y1111,yo sl,o 
jin) rctcrs to faith and to chanting Nam-myoho-rcnge-kyo It ti 
• 
. 
· 
1crcforc 
means the chanting ofNam•myoho-l'l'nge-kyo of the essential Ih' 
eac 1ng 
'Bmdy and vigorously' (y11m-) rcf-crs to faith. Acommentary [on th- 
Lotus Sutra] thcrdorc states: 'Yu (bravely) means to act with co urage· 
- 
(vigorously) means to expend all one's wisdom' Hence 'b 
1' 
· 
, ravey 
and vigorously' describes courageously bringing forth the power of fuith 
to the fullcst o.1enL Shojin (to exert on=lfl indicates the practice of 
chanting daimoln1. Acommentary therefore states: 'Slio (pure) means 
unadulterated; jin (cffon) means ceaseless advance.'" 
7. These words art an exclamation of joy when Shakyamuni's voicehearer disciples learn that they can in fact attain Buddhahood, which 
had pm-iously been denied to them. 
8. The thrtt bodies of the Buddha refer to the Dharma body, the reward 
body and the manifested body. The Dharma body is the fundamental 
truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is 
the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the compassionate actions the Buddha carries out to lead people to happiness. 
l!! i I 
... 
SGJ President Jkeda's 
Lecture Series 
a, HOPUILLED 
TEACHINGS" 
NICHIREH OAISHONIN 
The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life 
Aseries of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on Nichiren Daishonin's writing 
-rbeffedtage of the Ultimate Law of life." Nichiren states: "Shakyamuni 
......, "'Ibo attained enlightenment countless kalpas ago, the Lotus Sutra 
'llllltiads all people to Buddhahood, and we ordinary human beings are in 
-
-.rardfferent or separate from one another. To chant Myoho-renge-kyo 
,... ... .,ullzaticm Is to Inherit the ultimate Law of life and death." 
.. 
.-.o,JJ • SS.95 
Leaming From the Writinss: 
lhe Hor»-fflled Teachings of Nichiren Daishonin 
A,.,_dlec:llns bv SCI President Ikeda on IS writings from Nichiren 
A1lstloeln,Jndudlng 'Winter Always Turns to Spring," "The Dragon Gate," "The 
Sfraregy of the Lotus 5utra• and •Lessening One's Karmic Retribution." President 
flceda states in Che Introduction to this lecture series: "The writings of Nichiren 
DllshonJn fully elttddlll this philosophy of hope as well as its practice and 
prool. They n a source.of Illumination that endlessly encourages and inspires 
••• Let us strive to read with our llves--Olat ls, to put into practice-even a line 
or cwo of Nlchlren\ wt1dngs, which overflow with his spirit." 
SKU 1290992 • SUS 
Available at your local SGl·USA bookstore or from: 
(800) 626-1313 or bookstore.sgl-usa.org 
----

._ ____________________________ 
1,
Key Points 
When We Change, the World Changes 
-:- We ch_an-e, the world changes. The key to 
h 
ange 1s m our inner transformation-a 
c ange in our hearts and minds. This is human 
revolutio 
,., 
ll 
Wh 
n. ne a have the power to change. 
fi -n We realize this truth of life, we can bring 
s-t 
!hat power anywhere, anytime and in any 
uation N· h' 
ddh' 
b 
d 
h 
tr 
· 
1c 1ren Bu 
ism, ase 
on t e 
rn a-sfor-ative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has 
all a e this great path of inner change available to 
people, with the chanting of Nam-myohorenge-kyo as its core practice. (p. 38) 
Changing the Environment 
Through Changing People's Hearts 
Nichiren 
1 • 
, 
ch 
exp ams that when peoples hearts 
-nge, the land or their external environment 
ti -o change. At its foundation is a transformath'n °m delusion to enlightenment. What makes 
chis t-ansformation possible is the practice of 
tU:ting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spirilevel, faith. Simply put, through faith we can 
overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the 
ro_ot of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood 
With which we are originally endowed. (p. 39) 
Polishing Our Lives Through 
Chanting Nom-myoho-renge-kyo 
All living beings are inherently entities of the 
Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Buddhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of 
the Mystic Law within us freely and without hindrance, whenever and in whatever form it is 
needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life 
to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even 
though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we 
cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our 
lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a 
benighted state, we are like a "tarnished mirror" 
that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the 
tarnished mirror of our lives. (p. 39) 
Arousing Deep Faith 
and Making Continual Efforts 
The act of polishing is indispensable for restoring 
the mirror's innate property. Moreover, just polishing a mirror once is not enough. We have to keep 
polishing it if we wish it to retain its reflective property. As this metaphor aptly attests, our practice of 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to 
polish our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of 
ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our 
enlightened Dharma nature. This practice of polishing our lives may be seen as having two aspects. 
One is to "arouse deep faith; as Nichiren exhorts 
(WND-1, 4). This could also be articulated as summoning the fighting soirit to battle our inner 
darkness. The other asp- is to continue makin_g 
steadfast efforts,. in accord with Nichiren's admonition that we should "diligently polish our mirror 
day and night" (see WND-1, 4). (p. 40) 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
Is a Diligent Practice 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice. 
Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continu_ing 
to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires 
constant and unflagging exertion. Perseveri-g 
single-mindedly and consistently in this pracuce 
will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
Through such efforts, our inherent Buddhahood- the Buddha eternally endowed with the 
three bodies-wells forth in the form of ine.xhaustible courage, perseverance, joy, wisdom and 
compassion. (p. 43) 
45 

"!](i;•••·•c:.·:..···. 
--.- . •·. . 
- 
46 
The Mystic Nature of Our Lives-
"Become the Master of Your Mind 
Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You" 
What then does myo signify? It is simply the mysterious nature of our life from 
moment to moment, which the mind cannot comprehend or words express. 
When we look into our own mind at any moment, we perceive neither color 
nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for 
many differigg thoughts continually occur. The mind cannot be considered 
either to exist or not to mst. Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcends 
both the words and a>ncepts of existence and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor .a,n,nistence, yet e.mibits the qualities of both. It is the mystic entity 
of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality. Myo is the name given to the 
mystic nature of life, and ho, to its manifestations [ the manifestations of the 
mind of myo). Benge, which means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the 
wonder of this Law. If we understand that our life at this moment is myo, then 
we will also understand that our life at other moments is the Mystic Law, This 
realization u the mystic kyo, or sutra. The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the 
direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life, which 
manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the 
Mystic Law. ("On Attaining Budclbahood in 1'hil Ufetime,• The Wriii11gs of Nid1ire11 Daisl1011i
11, vol. J, p, 4 J 

"It is the heart that is important" ("The 
Strategy of the Lotus Sutra," WND-1, 1000), 
writes Nichiren Daishonin. Our hearts, our 
minds, are truly wondrous and unfathomable. We 
can expand and deepen the inner realm of our 
spirit infinitely and boundlessly. 
Like the elation of soaring freely through the 
vast blue heavens, the heart can feel immense and 
-trammeled joy. Like the clear, bright sunshine 
illum· 
· 
matmg all things, the heart can embrace 
Wi- warmth and compassion those who are suffermg. And like a lion of justice the heart can also 
:t _times tremble with righteou: anger and defeat 
vii. Indeed, our hearts or minds are constantly 
changin lik 
. 
. 
. 
g, 
e scenes m a drama or like an unfoldmg panorama. And nothing is more wondrous 
than the heart's ability to manifest the world of 
Buddhah d 
. 
oo . Even people weighed down by 
delusion and suffering can bring forth in the 
-epths of their lives the state of Buddhahood that 
15 one with the universe. This momentous drama 
0ftransfi 
· 
· th 
ormat1on 1s 
e greatest of all wonders. 
Buddhism finds supreme nobility and the 
Potential for great change in all human beings. 
In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," 
N' h" 
IC iren, therefore, concludes that when we 
thoroughly polish our lives through chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, it is possible for us to 
tap the life-state of Buddhahood no matter 
how steeped in delusion we may be, and to 
transform even the most impure and evil land 
into a pure land. 
Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the "mystic 
truth that is originally inherent in all living 
beings" (WND-1, 3). Accordingly, through the 
practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. we 
can reveal our inner Buddhahood-polishing "the 
tarnished mirror of a mind now clouded by the 
illusions of the innate darkness oflife" into "a clear 
mirror reflecting the essential nature of phenomena and the true aspect of reality" (see WND-1, 4). 
In other words, by manifesting the mystic truth 
that resides within us, we can tap our infinite 
inner potential. Buddhahood is the state of life 
that is one with Myoho-renge-kyo, the originally 
inherent mystic truth. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is 
also the name of this ultimate state of life. 
The passage Iwill discuss this time -Iains 
the relation between Myoho-renge-kyo and the 
mind of living beings in terms of the elements of 
myo, ho, renge and kyo. This -lanation may be 
seen as a description of how our lives become 
one with Myoho-renge-kyo and manifest the 
state of Buddhahood. Let us consider the profound meaning of this passage. 
The Mind Is the Mystic Entity of the 
Middle Way That Is the Ultimate Reality 
Nichiren Daishonin says that myo of Myohorenge-kyo signifies the marvelous nature of our 
lives from moment to moment And he uses the 
concepts of e.xistence and nonexistence to describe 
this wondrous and unfathomable nature. 
Our minds are in a state of constant flux, 
moving with the ebb and flow of countless 
thoughts and emotions. Nichiren notes: "When 
we look into our own mind at any moment, we 
perceive neither color nor form to verify that it 
exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for 
many differing thoughts continually occur. The 
mind cannot be considered either to exist or not 
to e;<ist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcends both the words and concepts of existence 
and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor 
nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both" 
(WND-1,4). 
47 

Ion Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
Nichiren describes this unfathomable 
nature of the mind as the "mystic entity of the 
Middle Way that is the ultimate reality" (WND-
1, 4). The Middle Way does not simply mean 
the middle course between two e>."tremes; lt 
refers to a more lofty perspective that is swayed 
by neither e>.."treme but also embraces them 
both. Shakyamuni set forth a sound philosophy 
and practice transcending the two then-prevailing e>.."tremes of hedonism and asceticism, 
and he called this the Middle '"'lay. ln "'On 
Attaining Buddhahood in This lifetime," Nichiren says that the ultimate truth, which 
transcends the two enremes of existence and 
nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the 
Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of 
truth, he calls it the .. ultimate reality." 
Transc.ending existence and nonexistence can 
be taken to mean transcending impermanent 
phenomena that alternate ceaselessly between 
existence and nonexistence. Further, exhibiting 
the qualities of botb exisreoce and nonexistence 
while transa:nding both does not refer to a transcendent or absolute being divorced from 
impermanmt pba,ornma. but indicates the truly 
etanal that enc:ompallel ad residei within 
iu.q,a 1n1rat;pltrnomma 
Renge Refers to the Principle of the 
Simultaneity of Cause and Effect 
Nichiren Daishonin ne>.-t states that 110, meaning 
Law or phenomena, is the name given to the 
manifestations of the mystic nature of our lives or 
minds--a term that can also be expressed as the 
wondrous mind or the "mind of myo:' The mind 
of myo is itself the Mystic Law. Abstract words 
and theories alone-be they the concepts of 
nonsubstantiality or the unification of the three 
truths-cannot be called the Mystic Law. For only 
when the Mystic Law is expressed as the higheSt 
human wisdom based on the Middle Way can it 
spread as a guide and compass, and as a teaching 
or Law (ho) for people to follow. 
In addition, Nichiren says: "Renge, which 
means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the wonder of this Law" (WND-1, 4). The Mystic Law is 
not visible to the human eye. Therefore, the Buddha uses a concrete symbol in order to help 
people understand the Law's wondrous and mystic nature. This is renge, meaning "lotus flower." 
Although )f,chim, npains the mysterious 
naiure of life or mind in tam& of the concepts 
of mstate and DftDt:DFfena- in this writing, 
what be -,s here is comparable to Nagarjuna's 
cona-pt of nomub.&tantiality,1 and to T'ient'ai's co-ts of the 1mificmoa of the three 
trutbs2 and the tbrcdold contanplation in a 
single mind.' Essentially, •the mystic entity of 
the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality' of 
which Nichiren speaks refers to our lives or 
minds that are one with the ultimate truth-a 
concept expressed variously as nonsubstantiality, the unification of the three truths, or 
threefold contemplation in a single mind. 
Why does he employ the lotus flower? Usually 
plants flower first and then bear fruit-a relationship that is used to illustrate linear or sequential 
causality, with the flowers representing the cause 
and the fruit the effect. In Buddhism, this is 
referred to as the nonsimultaneity of cause and 
effect. By contrast, the lotus flower puts forth its 
petals and its receptacle (which contains its fruit) 
simultaneously- in other words, its fruit is produced at the same time its petals open. The lotus 
thus symbolizes the principle of the simultaneity 
of cause and effect. 
The provisional teachings other than the Lotus 
Sutra do not teach that Buddhahood is inherent 
within the lives of ordinary people, which is 
regarded as the cause for attaining enlightenment. 
Rather, they teach that one can only gain the state 
of Buddhahood after undergoing countless eons of 
48 

Buddhist pr t' 
H 
• 
Iac ice. 
ere, cause and effect are nonsunu taneo 
Th 
. 
h 
us. 
e teachings of the Lotus Sutra 
owever cl 'fy h 
' 
d 
' 
ari 
t at all people are oriuinally 
en owed 
'th h 
O" 
WI 
t e state of Buddhahood and can 
reveal it · 
d Id 
IDStantaneous]y. In other words the 
eu ed 
. 
' 
tran fi 
mm- of an ordinary person is instantly 
s ormed Into th 
. d 
f 
en}' h 
e mm o myo (the supreme 
ig tenment) f 
B 
5Ytnbolizes 
. 
. 0 
a 
uddha. The lotus floweT 
th1s simultaneity of cause and effect. 
---faining the Mind of Myo 
e Mystic Kyo 
Nichiren o . h 
. 
. 
"sutr ,, 
ais onm explams that kyo, meaning 
a, of Myoh 
ky 
. 
ing the m 
. 
o-rengeo also refers to reahz-
Und 
Yshc nature of life. He says: "If we 
erstand th t 
lifi 
th 
a our 
e at this moment is mvo 
en we 
ill 
, , 
mo 
w 
also understand that our life at other 
rnents is the M 
. 
mystic k 
ystic Law. This realization is the 
:o, or sutra" (WND-1, 4). 
Kyo lS Wr'tt 
. 
. 
catm· 
1 en with a Chmese character indig the V 
• al 
f.ab . 
ertic 
thread, or warp, in a loom or 
nc and . . 
ti..... 
' 
_1t is also used to refer to the passage of 
.... ue. In this r 
N' 
• 
0 
• 
espect, 1chiren speaks of our lives 
r rn1nds t th. 
at oth 
a 
is moment and our lives or minds 
er moments. Our lives or minds are consdtankntly changing, but when we defeat our inner 
ar 
ess 
· 
• or ignorance, through strong faith 
expressed through our chanting Nam-myohorenge-kyo, the innate mystic truth appears within 
US, and the life of Myoho-renge-literally, lotus of 
the Mystic Law-blooms within our hearts. 
bone and marrow of our beings, with flowers of 
benefit blossoming in our characters and in our 
lives. This is the mystic kyo in terms of our individual lives. 
Also, we can regard this mystic kyo as the 
spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to 
others. When "the mind at this moment" is 
understood to mean the Buddha's mind and "the 
mind at other moments" is taken to mean the 
minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the 
Buddha's teachings that expound aspects of his 
enlightenment regarding the mystic nature of 
life, or the mind of myo. And the king of sutras 
that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is 
the Lotus Sutra, the essence of which is Myohorenge-kyo. In that sense, the development of 
kosen-rufu, with people propagating the Mystic 
Law and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
unstintingly for their own happiness and that of 
others and teaching others to do the same. could 
be said to correspond to the mystic kyo. 
As seen in the aforementioned discussion, 
Myoho-renge-k-yo is the law inherent in our own 
lives. The ongoing moment-to-moment transformation in our hearts and minds that we achieve 
through chanting Nam-myobo-renge-kyo not 
only leads to a fundamental inner change but to a 
change in the entire way we live our lives, putting 
us on track to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
And it further creates a groundswell for the great 
transformation of all humankind that is kosenrufu. The dynamic force for change on all levels is 
Myoho-renge-kyo. 
Becoming the Masters of Our Minds 
Since t-lyoho-renge-kyo is the law inherent within 
Day by day, through consistently chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can accumulate the 
causes and effects for attaining Buddhahood that 
make it possible to transform a mind clouded by 
the innate darkness of life into a mind rdlecting 
the essential nature of phenomena and the true 
aspect of reality (see WND-1, 4). The virtues of 
these causes and effects over time b«om- the 
• our lives. there is another topic Imust touch on. 
Namely, the relation between the mind of delusion clouded by innate darkness and the mind 

on Attaining Buddhahood In This Lifetime 
of myo illuminated by the essential nature of phenomena and the true aspect of reality. 
If we follow the deluded minds of ordinary 
people-minds that tend to be -,,..'Cak and easily 
swayed-our inner potential can rapidly wither 
or, even worse, we may succumb to negative and 
destructive impulses. This is a problem stemming 
from the subtlety of the mind. Because our minds 
are the key to attaining Buddhahood in this 
lifetime, we must overcome our own inner weaknesses. This is what our Buddhist practice is all 
about. The deluded minds of ordinary people are 
constantly wavering. We must not make such 
wavering minds our basis or guide. 
Nichiren Daishonin emphasizes this by citing 
the well-known passage .. Become the master of 
your mind rather than let ,our mind master ,ou• 
c·1.etter to the Brothen,·WND-1, 502). This passage is from tbeSixh•amitas Sutra. which states 
totbeeffect-oaimindsJDlfsudcleoJynm out of 
contmL n, fi.ae,1111e111111tmne tllelll like a wild 
dcphaot, -.,. 
minds to become our 
., __ ...._lmtadm-• rting10mara our minds.•• 
111c Niaw Salra cwt•rs & aimilar passage, 
•,May.t!bedM- mllfff«111Jmind and not Jet my 
mind :hemme -, m,ser,P' ("'l.elta- to Raijo: 
living true to that vow. This is the way of life 0! 
.. taking refuge in the Law" that Shakyamunt 
emphasized in his final injunction to his disciples 
before he died. s 
The priests of the various Buddhist schools 
during Nichiren's lifetime had forgotten this 
spirit of Shakyamuni. Following their own arbitrary minds or thinking, they lost sight of the 
Buddha's teachings, denigrated the Lotus Sutra 
and succumbed to arrogance. By contrast, Nichiren taught that the true master of the mind is 
Myoho-renge-kyo-the heart of the Lotus Sutra 
and the fundamental Law of all Buddhas-and 
set forth the concrete practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for mastering one's mind. Also, 
be frequently stressed to his followers the important spirit of faith to seek this true master of the 
mind-the Mystic Law. 
) -.."C..a.:-
-
..a.,:_ 
_,, 
•• 
WNl)...2,.5 • .,,J!QUIVClll 
_____ a15usa Mlffli'lllfflOn, many 
For example, when, on account of his faith, the 
elder of the Ikegami brothers6 was disowned by 
their father, Nichiren encouraged the two brothers, 
saying that this was precisely the time for them, 
based on faith, to unite and overcome the situation. He offers them this guidance: ''Apassage in 
the Six Paramitas Sutra says to become the master 
of your mind rather than let your mind master 
you. Whatever trouble occurs, regard it as no more 
times,maJring'it• guwHnefm-bis followcn. 
.Bca,miog die, maar of one's mind means 
having a sound a,mpaas in life and die bright 
beacon ofmth. Wcmmtnot 1,,-mastered by ordinary people's incomtant. weak and ever..dJanging 
minds of delmricui. To masta-om mioda, we must 
guide them in the right direction. In that &eDSC, 
the true master of the mind ii the law and the 
teachings of the Buddha Sbakyamuni vowed to 
make the Law to which he bad bec.omt enlightened the master of his mind. and he took pride in 
so 
than a dream, and think only of the Lotus Sutra" 
("Letter to the Brothers;' WND-1, 502). 
No matter what difficult circumstances we 
-y face, we can break through them without 
fail as long as our faith does not w 
F .th 
. 
b ttle 
aver. 
a1 
JS a a 
against our own inner w kn 
N:..L:_ 
ea esses. 
IUWCD teaches that to win in th1·s b Ib 
. 
att e, we 
must 
ase our hves wholeheartedly on the 
essence of the Lotus Sutra-the Mystic Law of 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo-without b . 
by weak-heartedness. 
eing swayed 

The Path of Mentor and Disciple 
Based on the Law 
Prom the story of the Ikegami brothers' triumph, we also learn the faith of the oneness 
of mentor and disciple. Because the brothers 
conducted themselves exactly as Nichiren Daishonin · 
d 
mstructe , they could overcome their 
ordeal· d' 
h 
. 
. 
. 
, 
1scern t e scheming of Ryokan, chief 
Pn-st of Gokuraku-ji, behind their father's 
actions; and in the end win the dramatic victory 
of their father taking faith. 
. To· allow ourselves to be mastered by our 
llllnds is to lead a self-centered existence. Ultimately, we will be pulled this way and that by our 
constantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism 
and ink · 
s 
into the depths of darkness or ignorance. Conversely, to become the master of our 
rniods is to live based on the Law. 
Ateacher or mentor in Buddhism is one who 
leads and connects people to the Law-teaching 
them that the Law on which they should depend 
-ready exists within their own lives. The disciples 
In turn seek the mentor, who embodies and is one 
With the Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, 
they exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. 
In this way, they lead lives in which they become 
masters of their minds. 
In other words, the existence of a mentorone who embodies and lives in complete accord 
with the Law, and who teaches people about the 
vast inner potential they possess-is indispensable for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
Ihad a mentor who practiced as the Buddha 
taught-our second Soka Gak.kai president, 
Josei Toda, who dedicated his life to widely 
propagating Nichiren Buddhism in the modern 
age-and that has made me who 1 am today. 
President Toda is always with me as my spiritual 
mentor. Even now, day after day, and moment 
by moment. 1 am carrying on a dialogue with 
my mentor in my heart. This is the spirit of the 
oneness of mentor and disciple. Those who 
hold fast to their spiritual mentor as their compass and exert themselves as that mentor 
teaches are people who live based on the Law. 
Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching founded on 
the oneness of mentor and djsciple. And the 
Lotus Sutra is likewise a scripture of the oneness 
of mentor and disciple. 
At the end of this writing, to convey the 
importance of the mentor-disciple relationship 
in walking the great path of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, Nichiren cites a passage 
from the "Supernatural Powers,. chapter of the 
Lotus Sutra.7 Next time, Iwill discuss the profound meaning of this passage, but suffice it to 
say here that the path to attaining Buddhahood 
is found in the practice of Bod.hisattvas of 
the Earth who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, 
the Law inherent in their lives. for both their 
own happiness and that of others, and who teach 
others to do the same. 
Above all, the great path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime- lies in practicing faith with 
the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple, 
making our minds one with the lofty mind of 
the Budd.ha and not being swayed by our in.ner 
darkness or the three poisons-greed, anger and 
foolishness. Faith based on the mentor-disciple 
spirit is the key to opening the treasure within 
our lives that is as vast as the universe. Moreover, 
courageously exerting ourselves in chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and taking action for 
kosen-rufu is the direct path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
0 
51 

On Attaining Buddhahoocl in This Lifetime 
1. Nagujuna: A Mahayana scholar of southmi India, th,"tght to ha,-r 
lh-N \>(twttn the- 150 and 250, ,..,1,o is t5!X'-iallr l..n<'wn for hi- 
S)-Stcmatization of tht doctrine of oonsu-tanrialit)'. N,,n!<\1h-tanti1lity is th, concept that things and r}ltnomcna hM no th- or 
independent nature or aistcncc ()f their own. 'Nag-rj11n• integrate<! 
the practical doctrine of tht Mi.idle Wa)\ ttan!-«ndinE, hc,th a->tti• 
cism and hedonism. and the con«rt <'f dtpmdtnt originati\'ln into 
the doctrine of nonsuhstantiality. ln othtr -tds. by ,i<-,,.ing an things 
not as entities ,..;th an ctemally fixNi nature NII &.( ahl'a)'li 1ssuming 
• temporary and changing - 
throuE,h thcit tdarion lo other 
things (i.e., dcpcndcnt origination), one can a.."t - 
on a trut -rctption of reality, "ithout cithtr anadtmcnt or fin,d rrtilldices (i.e., 
the Middle Way). 
2. Unification of th, thrtt truths: Based on tht 5'\."1lon in Nagarjuna's 
Trm- on - 
Middle War that inttgratcs the ron..--q,ts of nonS11bstan• 
tiality, dependent origination and the Middle Way, the Great Tcadler 
ricn-t'ai aubfuhcd the doctrine of the thlff t1llths: tht truth of 
nonsu-ntiality, the truth of trmporary aisttna and tht truth of 
the Middle Way. -
. - darifitd that these truths. rather than 
being sq,aratc and independent of one anothtt, arc th!ff -"Sof 
-g any particular thing or entity, and that the three moreover 
constitute an integral "'hole. rad! pos.scssing all three "ithin itself. 
This is ailed the unification of the three truths. 
3. Threefold mDtrmplation in a - 
mind: Amethod of meditation 
formulated byiim-t'ai toenablrpeopkto pm::tivrthe unification of 
the three truths of DODANbDriaJtty, trmpomy mslffla and the 
Middle \\'ay. While the cuaapa cl d,r ,rnifiation of the lhRlc truths 
,,,n-titutes tht do.:trinal oorc or 1''icn-t
1ni1 kndiln 
1 
l . . 
. l 
. d 
. 
81 t IC th .... , 
,,,nttmr nt1<m 1n • sing c n11n \\lllst,tutrs the rurc or 1 • ,''"'old 
rn1,1i.."t'. 1'his 'l\lntcm1•lati11t\ in\\1lvcs 11e1wiving the 11 t le r lcn.,·AI 
sinn1h1nro11sli• and pcrfu:tly intcgrattJ anti iutcrfuscJ ll'CI e h 111hs as 
1 , 
lb
' 
• 
ncach11 
nomcll('ln. I IS <'qllA to O S<'t\1118 l smglc llhllllcnt of lit 
) ,,. 
the thrtt thousanJ realms within it, At the same time e 8110 seeing 
h 
· 
• one Petcel 
that all r cMmcna consist of the thn.-c thous.ind realms. 
Yes 
4. The Six Panmitas Sutra states: "If you arc alwa"" the 11 
. 
. 
. 
, • 
l351cr of"'' 
mind rather than letting your mmd master )'OU )"Our t , d 
ivUr 
I 
11111 
Will 
run amok. lt is just like taming an elephant." 
no, 
S. Tot Buddha said: "[l)ivt as islands unto )"Ourselves, bcin 
refu 
. h 
Ifu 
. 
g Your own 
gc, :- .. )no on,_ -_scdas )-uhr rch ge, with the Dhamma [i.e., Dhar. 
IN, or IA" as an ts-n , wit t e Dhamma as )"Our refug• 
, h 
• 
. . 
,, w11 no 
other refuge. Mahapann1bbana Sutta: T11c Great PaJsi11g-17t 8 
,IL• , __ n,.. 
• Th r _ 
, 
C 11d. 
-""s -• ..,,.,-s, 1n 
e umg Disco1mts of tl,c B11d,ll1n· A Trnr,s/at' 
,, 
, 
, 
• 
' 
10 11 01 
the D1gha N1ka},a, translated by Mauncc Walshe (Boston: Wisdom 
Publications. 1995), p. 245. 
6. lktgami brothers: leading disciples of Nichiren Daishonin. The ,ld,r 
brother, Muncnaka, was twice disowned by the father, a follower of 
Ryokan, At tht same time, the father tempted Munenaga, the younger 
brother, to abandon his faith and take his brother's place as the next 
head of the family. Despite these adversities, the brothers persevered in 
faith, Tot father rescinded Munenaka's disinheritance and in the end 
took faith in Nic:hircn's teachings. 
7. Tot passage states: •After I [Shakyamuni) have passed into extinction/ 
[one] should acapt and uphold this sutraJ Such a person assuredly and 
without doubt/will atbin the Buddha way" (WND-1,4; LSOC. 318). 
Revolutionary Reading 
The Human Revolution. SlaJ #4182. $45.00 
The Human Revolution is SGI 
President Ikeda's account of second 
Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda's 
life and the Soka Gakkai's growth 
in postwar Japan. It provides keen 
insights into practicing Buddhism for 
maximum benefit and strengthening 
our Buddhist community's ability to 
bring happiness to more people. This 
abridged two-book set is a wonder-ul 
gift for yourself and to share -•th 
fellow members, friends and family. 
( -(- World Tribune 
v' -
Press-
Mailable 11t )'Olli' local 
s<; t-l:SA bookstore or from: 
(!iOU) 626-1313 • bool,store.sgl•l!Sll,Org 

Key Points 
The Meaning of Myo-the Middle Way 
Nichiren describes this unfathomable nature of the 
mind as the 
11mystic entity of the Middle Way that is 
the ultimate reality" (WND-1, 4). The Middle Way 
does not simply mean the middle course between 
two extremes; it refers to a more lofty perspective 
that is swayed by neither extreme but also 
embraces them both. Shakyamuni set forth a 
sound philosophy and practice transcending the 
two then-prevailing extremes of hedonism and 
asceticism, and he called this the Middle Way. In 
"On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime; 
Nichiren says that the ultimate truth, which 
transcends the two extremes of existence and 
nonexisten- and yet also manifests both, is the 
Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of 
truth, he calls it the "ultimate reality:' Transcending 
existence and nonexistence can be taken to mean 
transcending impermanent phenomena that 
alternate ceaselessly between existence and nonexistence. Further, exhibiting the qualities of both 
existence and nonexistence while transcending 
both does not refer to a transcendent or absolute 
being divorced from impermanent phenomena, 
hut indicates the truly eternal that encompasses and 
resides within impermanent phenomena. (p. 48) 
The Meaning of Rengethe Simultaneity of Cause and Effect 
The Mystic Law is not visible to the human eye. 
Therefore, the Buddha uses a concrete symbol in 
order to help people understand the Law's w-ndrous and mystic nature. This is renge, mearung 
"lotus flower." Why does he employ the lotus 
flower? Usually plants flower first and -en bear 
fruit-a relationship that is used to illustrate 
linear or sequential causality, with the flowers 
representing the cause and the fruit the_ effect. In 
Buddhism, this is referred to as the nonsunultaneity of cause and effect. By contrast, the lot- flower 
Puts forth its petals and its receptacle (which co?-
. . fr 't) 'multaneously-in other words, ,ts 
tams its u1 si 
. 
• 
als 
. . 
roduced at the same tune ,ts pet' 
open. 
-::t ;-ius thus symbolizes the principle of the 
simultaneity of cause and effect. (p. 48) 
The Meaning of Kyo-the Practice 
for Oneself and Others 
We can regard this mystic kyo as the spread of the 
Mystic Law from ourselves to others. When "the 
mind at this moment" is understood to mean the 
Buddha's mind and "the mind at other moments" 
is taken to mean the minds of all living beings, 
then kyo refers to the Buddha's teachings -at 
expound aspects of his enlightenment regardlllg 
the mystic nature of life, or the mind of_ myo. 
And the king of sutras that directly elucidates 
the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the 
essence of which is Myoho-renge-kyo. In that 
sense, the development ofkosen-rufu, with p-ople propagating the Mystic Law and chantl-g 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for t-eir 
own happiness and that of others and teaching 
others to do the same, could be said to correspond to the mystic lcyo. (p. 49) 
Mastering One's Mindthe Path of Mentor and Disciple 
To allow ourselves to be mastered by our minds 
is to lead a self-centered e.'Cistence. Ultimatdy, 
we will be pulled this way and that by o_ur constantly wavering minds, succumb to e-o1sm and 
sink into the depths of darkness or ignorance. 
Conversely, to become the master of our minds 
is to live based on the Law. Ateacher or mentor 
in Buddhism is one who leads and connects 
people to the Law-teaching them that the 1:'1w 
on which they should depend already e:osts 
within their own lives. The disciples in turn seek 
the mentor, who embodies and is one with the 
Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, they 
exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. In 
this way, they lead lives in which they become 
masters of their minds. In other words, the 
existence of a mentor-one who embodies and 
lives in complete accord with the Law, and who 
teaches people about the vast inner potential 
they possess-is indispensable for attaining 
Buddhahood in this lifetime. (p. 51) 
53 

{7) 
Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime-
Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path 
of the Oneness of Mentor and Disciple 
If you dlmt Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle [ that the 
entity of ,-r &lie is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law), you are certain to 
al:blDP 'Bw'-t t Min tbiF lifetime, That is why the sutra states, "After Ihave 
pa11ed into ediAffllJ!II, Ione] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a 
,palDD....ny aad without doubt will attain the Buddha way, [ The Lotus 
Sumi-4Ji,Oprnmg a,uJ <losing Sutras, p. 318 ). Never doubt in the slightest. 
Rapeclfully. 
Maintain yuarfaida and attain Buddbabf)()d in this lifetime. Nam-myoho-
- --
--Niddrm ("OnAalilliP&Btiddbebood in Tu JJfctime,• 77,e Writings of Nid1iren Dais'1011in, vol. I, p. 4) 
Birds follow the path of birds. and fish 
follow the path of fish. Similarly, there 
is a path for us to follow in life for 
achieving happiness as burnao beings. Ordinary people cannot easily see this correct 
path, but to the Buddha it is as plain as day. 
Nichiren Daishonin opened the indestructible path to happiness-the great path of 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime-for all 
humankind. This path is none other than the 
practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
The path of chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo is, in a sense, the most natural way for 
human beings to achieve enlightenment. This 
is because it is the means for us to reveal the 
"mystic truth that is originally inherent" in our 
54 

lives (see WND 1 3) 
. 
. 
- ' 
· Ntchuen emphasizes the 
:ryhnatural way in which chanting Namyo o-renge-ky all 
. 
1 
° 
ows us to manifest this 
nnate mystic truth. 
the -:-ins-ance, he writes (and Ihave inserted 
•cs m these passages): 
Shakyamuni's practices and the virtues 
h- consequently attained are all contamed 
"thin 
M 
WI 
the five characters of 
thyoho-renge-kyo. If we believe in 
b ese five characters, we will naturally 
e granted the same benefits as he 
was. ("Th 
. 
Ob 
. 
e ObJect of Devotion for 
serving the Mind," WND-1, 365) 
The five h 
c aracters of Myoho-rengekyo do not represent the sutra text nor 
are th 
· 
. 
• 
ey its meaning. They are nothing 
other tha 
th . 
n 
e mtent of the entire 
sutra. So, even though the begmn· ers in 
Buddh· 
. 
1st practice may not understand 
tbeir significance, by practicing these 
five characters, they will naturally conform to the sutra's intent. ("On the 
Four Slages of Faith and the Five 
stages of Practice:' WND-1, 788) 
If we do not harbor doubts in our 
hearts, we will as a matter of course 
attain Buddhahood. ("The Opening of 
the Eyes:' WND-1, 283) 
Because Myoho-renge-kyo is the inherent 
Law of life to which the Buddha became 
enlightened, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
represents an unerring practice for us to gain 
enlightenment. Hence. Nichiren says, "You are 
certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime'" 
(WND-1, 4). 
We may call it the most natural path, however, that does not mean that we do not have to 
make personal effort. As with any path, in order 
to enable many people to follow it, the way has 
to be opened, obstructions must be removed 
and a clear pathway must be trodden. Similarly, 
the path of chanting entails a struggle to 
maintain faith that Myoho-renge-kyo exists 
within us and to defeat the fundamental darkness inherent in our lives. 
When we embrace the five characters of 
Myoho-renge-kyo, we can positively transform 
the cycles of negativity, delusion and suffering 
that our lives have repeatedly undergone as a 
result of innate darkness or ignorance. We can 
naturally engrave deep within us the causality 
for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
Here, faith is the cause, and manifesting 
the life-state of Buddhahood is the effect. 
"To engrave the causality for attaining Buddhahood deep in our lives," therefore, is to 
vanquish th.rough faith the inner darkness that 
is the source of evil and misery, and to bring 
the rhythm of Myoho-renge-k1 o, the inherent 
mystic troth, to pulse vibrantly in our lives. The 
life-state of Buddhahood is perfectly in tune 
with this rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo. 
Through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
the causality of Buddhahood will come to supplant the causality of negativity that has emted 
in our lives. And when we forge strong faith 
that is impervious to any attack of fundamental darkness or devilish functions. the causality 
for attaining Buddhahood takes root in the 
very core of our beings. 
Faith, therefore, is absolutely crucial. That is 
why Nichiren underscores the importance of 
having "deep faith" in sharing the principle that 
our lives are entities of the Mystic Law (see 
55 

On Attaining 'Buddhahood In This Lifetime 
WND-1, 4). Indeed, we find Nichiren stressing 
the importance of faith throughout «on 
Attaining Buddhahood in this Lifetime." For 
instance, he writes: •summon up deep faith" 
(WND-1, 3), and "Arouse deep faith" (WND-1) 
4). He teaches that deepening our faith is the 
royal road to achieving enlightenment. 
The key to our enlightenment as ordinary 
people ultimately depends on how deeply we 
can believe this truth-that, by manifesting the 
Mystic Law inherent within our lives, we can 
definitely attain Buddhahood. 
•were They Not Bodhisattvas 
of the Earth, They Could Not 
Chant the Daimolcu· 
The kind of fiilh DCtdcd for attaining Buddhahood in this lifrtime muJd thus be described as 
faith that grows cva' derpa:. Sum faith is truly 
the halJrnam of Boctisattv!IS of the Earth.' 
N°ichiren Daishonin Wl1t5, -rhese bodhisattvas me the ma who had tboroughlyforged 
their resone•--m otha-words. they possessed 
•thoroughly forged faith• (-cieneral Stone 
Tiger." WND-1. 953). 
At the end of-on AttainingBoddbabood in 
This lifmme,- NJdma, c:ita the foJlowing 
passage from the -upernatural Powm of the 
Thus Come One" chapter of the Lotus Sutra: 
•After Ihave passed into extinction, ( one) 
should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a 
person assuredly and without doubt will attain 
the Buddha way"' (I.SOC, 318). He quotes this 
as saiptural evidence of gaining enlightenment through chanting the daimoku {or title] 
of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo. We can 
read this passage to mean that the thoroughly 
forged faith of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is 
56 
precisely the faith required for attaining lluddhahood in this lifetime. 
In the «supernatural Powers,, chapter, 
Shak-yamuni ·Buddha transfers the essence of 
the Lotus Sutra2 to Bodhisattva Superior Practices and the other Bodhisattvas of the Earth. 
He then outlines how these bodhisattvas 
should exert themselves in propagating the 
sutra after his passing. The above passage 
cited by Nichiren at the end of "On Attaining 
Buddhahood in This Lifetime" is the concluding part of Shakyamuni's description of 
benefits to be gained as a result of those 
efforts. Here, " [one] should accept and 
uphold this sutra" means accepting and 
upholding the dairnoku of the Lotus Sutra, 
Myoho-renge-kyo-the essence of the teaching transmitted by the Buddha to Bodhisattva 
Superior Practices. 
In "The True Aspect of All Phenomena:• 
Nichiren writes, "Were they not Bodhisattvas of 
the Earth, they could not chant the daimoku" 
(WND-1, 385). What is it that makes the chanting of Nam-rnyoho-renge-kyo so difficult then? 
Viewed from one perspective, it is because 
breaking through fundamental darkness and 
triumphing over devilish functions requires us 
to chant Nam-rnyoho-renge-kyo with strong, 
thoroughly forged faith. 
Chanting and Teaching Others 
To Do the Same 
Further, the true significance of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth's practice of chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo lies in their not only 
carrying out this practice themselves but teaching others to do the same. In other words, it is 
a practice for both self and others. 
a 

In his treatise "The Three Great Secret 
Laws," Nichiren Daishonin notes that, in the 
Middle Day of the Law, T'ien-t'ai and his 
teacher Nan-Yueh both chanted the daimoku 
of the Lotus Sutra, but they did so merely as a 
private practice and did not teach it to others. 
Nichiren clarifies that, in contrast, he not only 
chants it himself but teaches this practice to 
others.' 
The daimoku of the Middle Day remained 
merely an emblem for perceiving the mystic 
truth; it was not employed to actually lead people to enlightenment. In contrast, the daimoku 
of Nichiren Daishonin encompasses both practice for oneself and others-it has the actual 
power, when chanted with thoroughly forged 
faith, to break through fundamental darkness 
and enable all people to reveal their innate 
Buddhahood. 
SCI President Ikeda at 
the November J 0, 2006, 
Headquarters Leaders 
Meeting in Tokyo, Japan. 
Also, in "The Object of Devotion for 
Observing the Mindt Nichiren refers to the 
practice of chanting that he established as 
the "actual practice of the five characters of 
Nam-myoho-renge-k1'o .. (\-'D-1, 375). "Actual 
practice» here means chanting Nam-mrohorenge-kyo in terms of both faith and practice,• 
and establishing the causality of .Buddhahood 
as a reality in one's life. 
The actual practice of daimoku of the 
Bodhisattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of 
the law means chanting Nam-myobo-rengekyo for the enlightenment of all people--a 
practice aiming for the happiness of both 
oneself and others .. As Nichiren indicates 
when he says "At first only Nichiren chanted 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three, 
and a hundred followed, .. the essence of this 
practice is chanting it ourselves and also 
57 

. . 
Jdhahood In This L1fet111"1e 
on Attaan1ng 13U 
teaching it to others ("The n,,e Aspect of All 
Phenomena,"WND-l, 3s5). 
th 
The NaJD-myoho-renge-k-yo chant- by be 
BodhisattVaS of the Earth is characterized y 
deep, thoroughly forged faith to overco'?'e 
darkness and devilish functions. and by practice 
for both ourselves and others. Its essence, in 
short, is faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. 
Shortly after NichireD proclaimed the establishment of his teaching, ready and resolved to 
battle all obstacles. he composed this writing, in 
which he explains the principle of attaining 
Buddhahood in this lifetime. We must never forget how Nichiren's life, a momentous sn-uggle to 
spread the five charactaS of Myoho-renge-kyo, 
was a succession of great diffiadtit'Ji and persecutions. Wrthout a solid focus on how N'tehiren 
propagated the Mystic - 
any c:lisaJssio:o. of 
attaining Buddbaboocl in this lifdime will just 
be empty inteJJ«tgafizin& 
We should carmJly poDIH7° N1cbircn-s 
woms -&om t1ae-. t111t 1 .. bo.m until 
-
·J- ue,a-lw-a M¥fN nt's ease; I 
--oqfy•J.'J ....... -dairnolcu 
=-s:-••iaolySwordand 
The Faith of the Soko Catklll ls 
DlrllCt/yO,nnecmd to NldllrM 
Intbe-age,itisdlelint.. 
. 
of the Sob Gakb. [..,_·--- Padc:ats 
-
• 
.&IIIIIXRUIIIU M.tlkigudl. 
!:'!:,-l], tbarlng die boadl- 
.., whoJJaftpenevaed in tbettruggle 
- propagate Nam·m,obo-rmse-k,u with &ith 
directly connected to Niduren Daisbo . 
first three presidents ala 
witho 
nm. The 
their lives, 
ne, 
ut begrudging 
have fought against great hardships 
58 
.l 
,.,..,,tions like those described in the 
anu pers--.... 
Lotus Sutra-hatred and jca!ousy, slande: and 
b 
the six difficult and 1une easy acts, and 
a use, 
. 
6 N' I . 
, 
the three powerful enenues. 
1c uren s true 
lifeblood or heritage flows in the mentors and 
disciples united for kosen-rufu. 
Now, the sound of the chant of true 
BodhisattV3S of the Earth resounds throughout 
the world. Without the kosen-rufu-directed 
faith and obstacle-defeating daimoku practiced 
and spread by the Soka Gakkai, the practice 
of Nichiren Buddhism for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime would not exist today. 
Afighting faith through which we take on 
and overcome the three obstacles and four devils opens the life-state of Buddhahood. There is 
no attaining enlightenment without struggling 
against the three powerful enemies. Those who 
work unceasingly for kosen-rufu are genuine 
Buddhas. 
Our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei 
Toda, taught us the substance of the great state 
of Buddhahood in concrete terms. Mr. Toda's 
life was not an easy, uneventful one· it was a 
life of painful vicissitudes. 
, 
_To seek in Buddhism a life of peace and 
qwet, free of trouble, goes against its basic 
tenets. The lives of Shakyamuni Buddha and 
Nichiren D · h 
· 
• 
ais omn were fierce struggles, anything but tranquil and trouble-free. 
Bu--:uld -e s-id that the genuine spirit of 
indestru m_ lies in establishing a towering, 
L--L-- ctible state of life that not even the 
uaa,J.Qit obstacle can h 
- 
. 
of Buddhabood . 
. ar- .. J.rue attamment 
structin 
m this lifetime means conbe .a_e. g strdong faith that will absolutely not 
wi;1.eate 
by d 
·i· h 
ha b 
evi is 
functions Thi' 
· 
w 
t oth Shaky 
. 
· 
s is 
through th . 
amum and Nichiren taught 
e1r own examples. 

Viewed from the Buddhist perspective, 
Mr. Toda dedicated his life to demonstrating 
the state of Buddhahood of one who follows 
the highest human path. As his true, direct disciple, Iproudly proclaim the great victory of 
my mentor's human revolution. 
Overflowing With Life Force, 
Fulfilling Our Mission 
B-t just what is attaining Buddhahood? In 
discussing th· 
• 
. 
1s question, President Toda constantly declared it meant securing eternal 
happiness. "Attaining Buddhahood " he said 
cc 
, 
, 
means 
hi · 
ac evmg a state of being that allows us 
to always be reborn overflowing with powerful 
life force, to fulfill our mission to our heart's 
content, to achieve all our goals and to possess 
good fortune that no one can destroy." These 
are words of true philosophy that get at the 
heart of tt · · 
a ammg Buddhahood in language 
tbat is simple and straightforward. 
Mr. Toda continued, "And is it not greater 
till "f 
s 
1 we can enjoy tens, hundreds, thousands, 
te-s of millions of existences in this way?" Ican 
-till hear his voice ringing in my ears, filled with 
mdomitable confidence and conviction like the 
mighty roar of a lion king. 
Those who have dedicated themselves to the 
Mystic Law will, on each successive rebirth, 
overflow with vibrant life force, accomplish 
a mission for kosen-rufu that only they can 
achieve and enjoy immense, indestructible 
good fortune. They can joyfully savor such lives 
again and again. 
Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, one 
could say, allows us to solidly ente..- this eternal 
path. Countless Soka Gakkai members have 
done so. As long as actual proof of the Mystic 
Law continues to blossom brilliantly in each 
person's life, the faith of the Soka Gakkai will 
shine eternally. Mr. Toda dedared that the life of 
each Soka Gakkai member would be recorded 
in future sutras as "Soka Gakkai Buddha." 
Of course, each aspect of birth, aging, sickness and death is part of the reality of our lives 
in this world. Our physical bodies cannot 
escape the changes found in the cycle of formation, continuance, decline and disintegration to 
which all phenomena in the universe are subject. Naturally, our bodies deteriorate as we 
age. If practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism 
were to retain youthful bodies forever, it would 
go against the laws of nature! As we thoroughly 
polish ourselves through faith, however, the 
inner essence of our lives will never decay. 
Ihope that all our pioneering and senior 
members who have dedicated themselves to 
kosen-rufu with such sincerity over the years 
will cheerfully, proudly adorn the final chapter 
of their lives with noble victory, confident of 
this point. Please continue to strive with the 
spirit of fresh challenge! looking at Nkhiren's 
writings, there is absolutely no doubt that those 
who forge such a fighting spirit in this c.'Cistence 
do attain the lofty spiritual state allowing them 
to make their way freely, joyfully, through the 
journey of eternal life. 
In describing this free, untrammeled state 
of life that continues across eternity and 
encompasses the entire universe, Mr. Toda 
would often say humorously; U'\;Ve die, but we 
are reborn. For my part, 1 would like to come 
back as a stunning beauty!» He would then go 
on to joke that this beauty would be famous 
around the world, with people flocking to buy 
her photos and get her autograph. Of course, 
59 

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
L-------.:..:.:;.::--------- 
he said, she would never give her autograph to 
bad or hateful people. 
Mr. Toda died at fifty-eight-not an old age 
by any means. The two years he had spent in 
prison for his beliefs during World War Il had 
left his health seriously damaged. And the 
intense frenzy of activity over the next several 
years, which saw him work all out to rebuild 
the Soka Gakkai and fulfill his duties as president, also brought bouts of illness. 
When a Soka Gakkai leader once asked him 
why he was ill, Mr. Toda answered: "My being 
sick like this represents a great 'leswting of 
karmic rctribution.7 Instead of the Soka Gakkai 
being destroyed, Igot this illness."' 
He also once told someone: -when Idie, Ithink Iwill return to Nidmm's side and stay 
there for about a was or tm days. Given the 
fact that tine- ow111Q1lv;s planets like the 
P.arth in 111e ■■s$a aae. if MN • 
bids me to 
go 10 oae<Clf:.6,a ..t 111111k a Jrose:n-rufu 
--•••cf t 1J111t1ataimtructed.• 
....... 
rffl Ialle of Jifie he pos-
·161- ,to • 
11,.,._. to arry out 
Nimii:a--..11em,e. 
- 
.. ,......,..-.ethic immense 
---iifeaiah•lllallf-•pwilk T.o 
mme1 i•1L41i■wt padion f/l;6,: ffllighteumtilt be!iiidp,ial. - oita· 1MJ1,t - that 
the life..state of.,.,...._ --- ahtohrte 
bappinaE'WnohJte --• 
••to 
-a«me of imp, cllible ;a, ia oada 
life every--inonitlifeatada ---
Mr. Toda, inspired by the majestic form 
of indomitable Mount Fuji, dauntlessly took 
the lead for kosen-rufu until his very last 
moment. Ifirmly believe his noble life is an 
example to all of us of attaining Buddhahood 
in this lifetime. 
The Lion's Roar of -entor 
and Disciple United 
Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we 
cannot attain Buddhahood. Through that sort 
of spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood 
becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of 
our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be 
expressed in various other ways, such as: the 
spirit of "true cause," of always starting from 
now; the resolve to never regress in faith; the 
heart of a lion king; the refusal to be defeated; 
faith that grows stronger day by day. 
Thus Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, chanted with 
this spirit, is none other than the source of infinite 
advance. No painful difficulty or karma is an 
obstacle for the daimoku of lion kings. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has the power to turn adversity 
into a springboard for growth, to change karma 
into mission, to transform even sorrow into a 
wdlspring of creativity. Nichiren Daishonin's very 
life pulses in Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 
Further. by strag1ing for lmlm-mfu to the 
very end; we can l1M>r IUch an apamivc state 
ofbeiiig during our final days. Mr. Toda taught 
that this is proof of attaining Buddbahood in 
this lifetime-proof of having euterecl the path 
of eternal happiness. 
The daimoku of Soka Gakkai members 
struggling for kosen-rufu is the same as the 
daimoku chanted by our first and second 
presidents, Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda, to 
achieve the great desire of the happiness of all 
humankind. If we forget this fighting daimoku 
of courageous lion kings, our chanting will 
deviate from that of our mentors. In that case, 
our chanting will not produce the sound of the 
60 

lion's roar, which is created by mentor and disciple chanting together.8 Not only will it not be 
the daimoku of Nichiren, it will constitute the 
practice of an inferior teaching that has no 
relation to the spirit of Shakyamuni. 
We may surmise that Nichiren quotes the 
Passage from the "Supernatural Powers" chapter in the final section of this writing to teach 
this solemn spirit of mentor and disciple. 
Indeed, viewing it in this light accords with the 
spirit to always base ourselves on Nichiren's 
Writings, which are the heart of the Soka 
Gakkai, an organization directly connected to 
Nichiren Daishonin. 
He closes "On Attaining Buddhahood in 
This Lifetime" with the admonition: "Never 
doubt in the slightest ... Maintain your faith 
and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime" 
(WND-1, 4). Faith is absolutely essential. 
To return to the opening of this writing, 
Nichiren talks of freeing ourselves from the 
sufferings of birth and death we have endured 
since time without beginning and attaining 
Without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this 
lifetime (see WND-1, 3). The purpose of our 
present existence is to cut the chains of suffering 
1. Bodhisattvas of the Earth: Disciples of Shaltyamuni &om the remote 
past whom he calls forth in the •Emerging &om the Earth• chapttt -r 
the Lotus Sutra and entrusts with propagating the Lotus Sutra after bu 
passing. They are known as Bodhisattvas o- the - 
tor they appear 
from the earth Their leader is called Superior Practices. 
2. Transfer of the essence of the Lotus Sutra; - the •Supernal- 
Powers" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuru entrusts the_ sutr.u 
teaching to Bodhisattva Superior Practices and the other - 
of the Earth. This is called the "transfer of the n5oence -use 
Shakyamuni describes the autra u wntaining: 1) "all - 
doctnncs 
possessed by the Thus Come One"; 2) "all the &ttly cx,:rc4 5.:tJ'7{-
natural powers of the Thus Come On-"i J) - 
stothoW:C 0- 
aecret essentials of the Thus Come One ; and 4) all 
e -•-;nuw1 
One• .. ,u;_ft that •a11 thac arc r---
mauen of the Thus Come ,._;. - 
• (LSOC. 316) 
revellled and clearly expoun_.. 111 
suttll 
• 
of the 
l. Nichire- writes. •Now, howcv;:: -ha--- 
---y 
th.ii of 
Law and the daimoku th.at I, 
ac 
n. 
I& 
bo·Llice 
! 
Th' Nam-myoho-rcnF-kyo eoc:ompaMC,1 
.,. prK 
:arher ::.f-nd t-e ,-.aching of othen" ("On the Receiving of the ThrN 
,or one 
,. WND-.2, 9'16). 
Grc.11 Seem Law\ 
,tial &ca.:hin& (Nun•mJ'Oho-rcngc-kyo) bu 
4. The daimo-i::f J.-=- of C.ith and the daimok1& of pr11etice. Tb.t 
IWO a•pc"s: • bcliew in the Gohonron. the latlef to dwlt Namform« nicans to 
rad' 
mf')ho-rcnge-kyo and sp 
at. 
we have endured from the beginningless past 
and establish the eternal state of Buddhahood. 
By challenging ourselves with all our hearts so 
as to have no regrets in this lifetime, we can 
forge a state of Hfe victorious and free of 
regret throughout eternity. 
!know 
the wonder of 
supreme happiness 
and the bn1liant victory 
of a great life. 
Icomposed this poem at the start of 2006 
with the wish that all SGI members will lead 
tremendously fulfilling lives. May each of you 
make your way triumphantly along the path of 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, enjoying this "supreme happiness" and the "brilliant 
victory of a great life." 
Let us resolutely win in the struggle to 
attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, which condenses eternity into this present moment, and 
let us joyfully continue our journey of kosenrufu together across eternity. 
0 
S, Six difficult and nine CIL>)' IKU: The- ,:owcr• chapter 0f - 
Lotus Sutn cxplaim from six pcnpcctaws the difficulty - pracnong 
the Lotus Suu-a after Shakyamuni's passing. By -tnsi. II de,cribes 
. 
. gly . po,wble a..'l:ions. such as throwing Mount Swncru 
--- ': ....,....._ .ua>mpantivdyQSJI (stt LSOC 213-1_9). 
into i&IIU<UQ wor -,-
· 
r th •Encour3g111g 
6. Thrtt powuful enemies: The vcne - 
o 
e 
le who will 
Devotion' chapter of the Locus Sutra describes ':"er- 
after 
IC a ptnOn who sp.-b the l.o(ua Sutra ID 
.age 
penecu 
., 
. 
,_ his Annocatio,u"" "TJw Wc>nls and Plirrua 
Shaky.unUIU Spa,wng. U& 
L-t• 
• 
(0 
uj rlw WIMS - 
• Miao-lo dc1aibcs tbac people as uaungmg 
three Cll- anopDI lay pq,ic, arrogant IDOJIU and DWIS, and 
am>gl&DI false s.aga (Stt LSOC.2"--3-0. 
. 
LCilCIWI lwmk Mribution: The principle that one can apmence 
7
• the ctre.! of biW brma from the past to • lcsscr degrtt b«ause of 
Buddhist faith and ra.:tice. 
• 
a. T1ttr RA'WJ of tlw 4 
Thlluminw/ TNChinp says: •-e Uo;: - 
(shi.w .b,) is the pmidling of the BudJha. The prnch-g of 
lllftDI the piaching of the Lorus Surra. - the !--lf 1'!00-: 
kyo • partiaal.ir. The 6nt Jiu of the ....,... --. or 
0 
m-misc-.. -,---'I . .L \\ondcrful Law that is passed on by the 
(which IDCIUII - 
, IS we 
.a.-.,•-
·1 
....__ •--..t -L: [which means 'child'] is the Woouci1w IAW as I 
IICIM:hcr. •""" onuuu .,.. 
'lio • 
') • the 
. 
. __ ,. by the duciplcs. The 'roar' [or the term 
RI roar u 
IS leCClffQ 
• 
• 
• 
" (OTT, 111) 
IOl&lld of the INCha and the disciples chanting Ill WUSOII 
• 
• 
61 

on Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
Key Points 
Faith Dedicated to Kosen-rufu 
The Path of Chanting 
Is the Natural Way To 
Achieve Enlightenment 
The path of chanting Nam-myoho-rcnge-l--yo is, 
in a sense, the most natural way for human beings 
to achieve enlightenment. This is because it is the 
means for us to reveal the "'mystic truth that is 
originally inherent" in our lives (see WND-1, 3). 
Nichircn emphasizes the very natural way in 
which chanting Nam-myoho-rcnge-kyo allows us 
to manifest this innate mystic truth. (pp. 54-55) 
The actual practice of daimoku of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of the Law 
means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the 
enlightenment of all people-a practice aiming 
for the happiness of both oneself and others. As 
Nichlren indicates when he says "At first only 
Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but 
then two, three, and a hundred followed;' the 
essence of this practice is chanting it ourselves 
and also teaching it to others ("The True Aspect 
of All Phenomena," WND-1, 385). 
Strong Faith ls Re.quired 
To Attain Buddhahood 
In This Ufetime 
The kind of mda neec1ec1 for attaining Buddhahood in.tlm tifdimeamla dms be described 
a faith dlat.,.. am -cJeq,u. Such faith is 
-jlrieMmewt#Jlc+iean-uof thc Earth. 
N'din:PPfitl\!ri1t---. "'1'bae boctbisat;tvas 
are the o,11rJ w1le W 6omuahlJ Ji:qed their 
----other._.., 6q poge-4 "'thoroujhly foiged faith• (T..a,enJ Stone lager: 
WNIJ..t,953). 
:Atthe aidof--0. AUa,inm.g Baddbabood in 
Thurifctlme,•\Nimimi-.6e6,Dowjngpu-
.. 
&omthe-&1peaJ1t11r4Powcn(tltheThus 
Come e>ne--cdlelAIIIIIISma:•Afta Ihavepauedhlt,i - 
[oae] tbould.accept 
and uphold this 111tra. Sada a pmo11 ....-edly 
and without doubt .wi11 attain die 8wlc1ha 
way" (LSOC; 318). He - 
this II Kripture1 
evidence of pining enJightenmeat through 
chaliting the tlaimob, (or title] of tbe Lotus 
Sutra, Myoho-R11ge-kyo. We can rad this passage to mean that the thoroughly forged faith of 
the Bodhisattva of the Barth ia precisely the 
faith required for attaining Buddbabood in this 
lifetime. (p. 56) 
62 
The Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted by the 
Bodhisattvas of the Earth is characterized by 
deep, thoroughly forged faith to overcome darkness and devilish functions, and by practice for 
both ourselves and others. Its essence, in short, is 
faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. (pp. 57-58} 
Opening the Life-State of Buddhahood 
Afighting faith through which we take on and 
overcome the three obstacles and four devils opens 
the life-state of Buddhahood. There is no attaining 
enlightenment without struggling against the three 
powerful enemies. Those who work unceasingly 
for kosen-rufu are genuine Buddhas. (p. 58} 
Attaining Buddhahood 
With a Challenging Spirit 
Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we cannot attain Buddhahood. Through that sort of 
spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood 
becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of 
our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be 
expressed in various other ways, such as: the 
spirit of"true cause," of always starting from now; 
the resolve to never regress in faith; the heart of a 
lion king; the refusal to be defeated; faith that 
grows stronger day by day. (p. 60) 

Index 
Aaction, Buddhist wisdom into, 12; 
taking, 43, 51 
attitude, 29, 32, 34, 41 
Bhodhisattvas, 39 
Bodhisattvas of the Earth, 56; practice of 
the,57-58 
Buddha(s), 13, 31, SO, 58; and ordinary 
people, 4, 22, 24, 38-39; 
Bodhisattva Superior Practices 
and,56 
Buddhahood,2-9,13-14, 17-18,21-24, 
29-34,39,41-43,47,49-51, 
54-61; scriptural evidence of 
attaining, 56. See also Myohorenge-kyo; Nam-myohorenge-kyo 
Buddhism, 13, 17, 22, 47 
Ccause and effect, 21, 48-49, 55 
challenging spirit, 41 
compassion, 43 
courage,34,41,43 
Ddaimoku [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo], 
56-57,60-61 
"Devadatta" chapter (Lotus Sutra), 4 
difficulties, 34, 55 
"The Difficulty of Sustaining Paith,» 41 
E 
"Earthly Desires are Enlightenment," 42 
"Emerging from the Earth" chapter 
(Lotus Sutra), 43 
"The Entity of the Mystic Law," 14 
"Expedient Means" chapter (Lotus 
Sutra), 40 
Ffaith, 3, 5-7, 9, 20-22, 24-25, 30-34, 
39-43, 49-51,55--61; dedicatedto 
kosen-rufu,58 
"The Farther the Source, the Longer the 
Stream," 42 
fighting spirit, to battle our inner fundamental darkness, 40, 59, 60 
fundamental darkness, 8, 18, 20-21, 24, 
29-32,34,39-42,47,49,51, 
55-58 
G 
"General Stone Tiger," 56 
Gohonzon, 31 
grave offenses, 30 
Hhappiness, 2, 13, 21-22, 43 
"Happiness in This \Vorld;> 21, 41 
heart, importance of, 5, 6, 21, 29, 34, 38, 
39, 47, 49. See also mind 
ho,48 
"How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way 
Can Attain Buddhahood through 
the Lotus Sutra,» 23 
63 

On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
human existence, 11 
humankind, 18; changing destiny of, 8-9, 
17, 49. See also kosen-rufu 
Iinnerchange,-,8,29,38-39,49 
Kkosen-rufu, 33, 42, 51, 58-61. See also 
humankind 
kyo,49 
L 
"Letter to Niike:' 24 
"Letter to Rmjo,• so 
"Letter to the BJ:Othm.: SO 
•Life Span" mapler (lotus Sutra), 14 
liring truefO c,n•adf (Josei Toda), 25 
Lo1Us Sutra, 13-14. 16-17-22, 33, 38, 
49-51,58 
Thdatus Svtman4lts Opening and 
Closing 5mm. 38 
M 
Mahayana BucJdlinm. 13. 25 
Makigudu, Tsunesabum, 1.33. 58,at; on 
Nichiren ll11ddbism, 43 
Manjuslui, 39 
"The Meaning of the Saaed Teachings of 
the Buddha's Lifetime,• 26 
mentor-disciple relatiomhip, 3.3, 43, S 1, 
5-1 
Middle Day, practice ot 57 
Middle Way, 48 
mind(s), 5-8, 14, 16-17, 21, 29-30, 34, 
38-39, 43, 47-51. See also heart 
myo,47-49 
64 
Myoho-renge-k')'O, 14-15, 17, 21, 23, 47, 49, 
55. See also Buddhahood; mystic 
truth; Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
t{ystic Law, 6, 22-24, 29, 33-34, 39, 50, 
56, 59. See also Myoho-renge-kyo; 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
mystic truth, 6, 13-17, 21, 41, 47, 49, 55, 
57; manifesting the, 4. See also 
Myoho-renge-kyo 
N 
Nagarjuna, 48 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, 3, 11-12, 15-18, 
20-24,26,29-34,38-43,47, 
49-51, 54-55, 57; and fighting 
spirit, 60; mirror analogy, 6, 
37-40, 42, 47. See also Buddhahood; Myoho-renge-kyo 
Nan-Yueh, 57 
negative functions, 55; defeating, 5 
Nichikan,14, 18,31,40 
Nichiren Buddhism, 2-4, 7-9, 12, 14, 
16-18,20,26,30-31,33-34, 
40-41,43,50-51,57-59 
Nichiren Daishonin, 2-4, 6-9, 11-15, 
17-18,20-21,23,25-26,28-30, 
32,34,37-42,46-49,54-58, 
60-61; admonition of, 24, 31, SO; 
and human beings, 5 
Nirvana Sutra, 50 
non•Buddhist thinking, 29-31 
0 
"The Object of Devotion for Observing 
the Mind:' 21, 55, 57 
"On Persecutions Befalling the Sage," 42 
"On the Four Stages of Faith and the 
Five Stages of Practice:' 55 

ordinary people, 4, 21-22, 24, 38, 48, 50, 
54,56 
p 
"Persecution by Sword and Staff," 58 
perseverance, 41-43 
polishing our lives, by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, 39-42 
pre-Lotus Sutra teachings> 4, 22-23, 48 
present existence, 61 
provisional teachings. See pre-Lotus 
Sutra teachings 
Pushkin, Aleksandr, 18 
R 
The Record of Orally Transmitted Teachings, 29-30, 42-43 
religion(s), 22, 25; purpose of, 11 
renge, 48-49 
Ryokan,51 
s 
seeking the Law of Nam-myoho-rengekyo, 6, 8, 25, 28-32 
"The Selection of the Time:' 22 
SGI, members of the, 3, 9, 33, 61 
Shakyarnuni, 11, 13-14, 30, 48, SO, 56, 
58,61 
Six Paramitas Sutra, 50 
Six-Volume Writings (Nichikan), 31 
slander, 32-33 
Soka Gakkai, 31, 33, 59; members, 42, 
59-60; and Nichiren's writings. 61 
"The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra,» 21, 47 
substituting faith for wisdom, 30-31, 35 
sufferings of birth and death, 2, 3, 4, 11, 
12, 13,28,37,38,39,61 
''Supernatural Powers" chapter (Lotus 
Sutra), 51, 56, 61 
T 
"The Teaching, Practice and Proof; 34 
"The Three Great Secret Laws," 57 
three thousand realms in a single 
moment of life, 14, 15, J 8, 24 
"The True Aspect of All Phenomena:' 7, 
56,58 
T'ien-t'ai, 14, 16-17, 48, 57; Buddhism 
of, 30 
Toda, Josei, 24, 33, 42, 51, 58; on Buddhahood, 59-60; on illness, 60; 
and the 1'1ystic Law, 25; "Soka 
Gakkai Buddha; 59; on the 
young women's division, 34; on 
youth, 43 
Toki Jonin, 3 
transmigration, 12-13 
twenty-first century, transforming. 2 
u 
unity, 33 
Vvictory> 43 
Vimalakirti, 39 
Vimalak.irti Sutra. 38-39 
w 
wisdom> Buddhist, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 
30>32,38,43,48 
65 


Notes 
Ii -
- --·------------------
11 
I! 
I 
Il 
I 
Ii 
' I 
\ 
I 
: t 
I 
It 
I Ir-
---
-
L - 
67 

On Attaining 'Buddhahood in This Lifetime 
Key Points: 
The Essence of Chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
The Law contained in the practice of chanting 
spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. But C\>cn the 
power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest 
in -a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the 
inner darkness that prevents us from believing in 
the Mystic Law and sta}ing focused on our own 
Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of 
chanting enables us to break through this darkness 
and vibrantly bring forth om Buddhahood. Battling our fundamental darkness-this inner 
struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myohorenge-kyo. (p. 29) 
The Heart of Buddhism 
If• seek mfigktm•M"lll outside of us, we are not 
punoiog the pill m .observing one·s mind," 
wbidlmatilamtoommmetbefundamental evil 
ti ip«AM' « Giil•M5S In that case, all our 
effimandgoocldcrdstoattam cnligbtenm-t will 
be Jacking the Yitai ingr,dic:nt; they will be every 
bit as fulile ac mpntjn_g .a neighbor's vast riches. 
Moreover. because none of these efforts will help 
u, enctic:ate QIU' igaormc.e. they will only become 
•an endless. painfid alJltrritr,' This battle against 
igoo-is the bartoflluddbism (p. 30) 
The Orlving Fora for 
Our Transformation 
If we chant to the Gohom.on but always blame 
other people or our environmeat for our circumstanc:es, we are avoiding - 
challenge of tadding 
our inner darkness or ignorauc.e. By doing so, we 
are seeking enlightenment outside of us. By changing ourselves on a more profound level that we 
can begin to improve our situation. Chanting 
Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that 
change. (p. 31) 
36 
Confident and Concrete Prayer 
The erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the 
Mystic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its 
core an inability to believe that all people-ourselves and others-possess the Buddha nature. 
And this disbelief stems from fundamental darkness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to 
skeptically regard the Buddha nature as "a nice 
ideal but one that doesn't really change reality" will 
manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking in 
conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted, 
we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally 
transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this 
writing when he says, "You must summon up deep 
faith" (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inherent Buddha nature the basis of our lives-or as 
Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this 
lifetime-we must continue striving to deepen our 
faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myohorenge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will 
manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43) 
Overcoming Grumbling 
and Complaining 
Grumbling and complaining are the principal 
gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbelief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find 
ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of 
ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual, 
it will act as a constant brake on our growth and 
cause us to forget about advancing and improving 
ourselves. We will then effectively close off our own 
potential, falling into the path of seeking the Law 
outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to 
stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive 
from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these 
tendencies and use them as a springboard for positive growth and development. (p. 32) 

J 
- 
' 
" ' 
,. 
.. , 
:.·" ... 
[s) 
Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
With a "Brave and Vigorous" Spirit-
Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge 
The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas' emancipation 
in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities 
of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It 
also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also 
impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands. 
pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of 
our minds. 
It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is 
called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This 
is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewd when polished Amind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, 
reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature) and the 
true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day 
and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo. ("On Au:iining Bud<lh.,hlll•d in This Lifecirn-." 1'/r- ll'ri1i11l-- of N1.:/1im1 D.lish,J11i1- vol. I, p. -) 
37 

On Attaining 13uddhahood in This Lifetime 
the great treasure storehouse that brings -x-..d 
fortune and happiness to all. The important thing 
is to live out our lives based on and completely in 
sync with the Law; it is to imbue and solidify our 
lives with the Mystic Law. 
Our daily realities are filled ·with an endless 
succession of problems. But with the firm belief 
that our lives are M.yoho-renge-l.1•0, we should 
strive to boldly challenge everything with the 
unwavering conviction that we can overcome all 
hardships and become happy without fail. \.\ 1hen 
we maintain deep faith based on the foundation 
that •1 am Myoho-renge-1..--yo,., we can take on any 
problem with courage. The key to victory in life 
lies in "-hethcr we can bring forth courage. Not a 
shrinking timidity but a challenging c.ouragetbis is what WC need to have! 
h,- of the obstacles we may encounter 
in the comse of om practice, we must not retreat 
a single stq,. 'We must not be alarmed or startled 
bylhan. lbcpc,wa-ofdlCMysticLaw (Myoho-
-) 
cani1i1u1gia"wn'anything. To become 
Ii.I 
---
• 
deept,,ca,Jeal:-.-•mostnnportant. 
FearlnBbardmipsau8bemoauingand resentingom amrnlllllffltaneto believe that the Law is 
outside our own Ji1a. So • bing confidence m 
our abilily to Owm»IIIC om clu:wmtances and 
turning_, otba:s in die hope dial they will save 
us, or blaming ,em for our problems, or giving 
in to hopelcsmeuaadresi,gaation. 
What diffindties beset us.no matter how trying they may be, we must dearly see them for the 
obstacles or dmlisb fuoctiom they are and battle 
against them without retreating. This is the way 
of life of those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 
and dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law. 
N'ichiren Daishonin says, •[My] disciples cannot 
accomplish anything if they are cowardly" ("The 
Teaching, Practice, and ProoC' WND-1, 481). In 
34 
ao::ord with these words, let's cast aside coWl\rlticc 
and make courage our foremost attribute. 
People of courageous faith can break through 
the dark clouds of fear, ignorance and delusion to 
bring the sun of the Mystic Law to shine and 
beautiful flowers of Myoho-renge-the lotus of 
the Mystic Law-to bloom in their lives. 
President Toda gave the following guidance to 
young women's division members in the pioneering days of our movement: "You should take 
pride in possessing the same life as the Buddha of 
the Latter Day. Win in life with a noble spirit. You 
must absolutely never depreciate yourselves." 
Nichiren Buddhism starts from the realization 
that the supreme life-condition of Buddhahood 
exists in each of us. It is a teaching that makes it 
possible for us to achieve the profoundest inner 
transformation-a transformation of our fundamental attitude or mind-set. That's why Nichiren 
emphasizes the importance of our minds, of 
what's in our hearts. 
He writes: "Whether you chant the Buddha's 
name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and 
incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits 
and roots of goodness in your life. With this conviction you should strive in faith" (WND-1, 4). All our 
efforts in faith-including our practice of reciting 
the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo each morning and evening, as well as all of our 
various Soka Gakkai activities-are virtuous acts 
that "implant benefits and roots of goodness" in 
our lives. Those who advance with this deep awareness will be true victors who travel the direct path 
to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. 
Always upholding the great philosophy 
embodied in Nichiren's words "It is the heart that 
is important" (WND-1, 1000), let us lead magnificent, victorious lives! 
0 

I. Miao-lo, 11,t A1111otntior11 on "Great Concentration and Insight." 
2. AJ us«! here, "the Buddha's name" denotes Nam-myoho-renge-lcyo. 
J. Three meaninga o( myo; In "The Daimo ku of the Lotus Sutrat 
Nlchlren Daishonin writes: "Myo mea ns to be fully endowed, 
which in turn has the meaning of ' perfect a nd full'" (WNO-I, 146); 
"The character myo means to open" (WNO-I, 145); and "Myo 
means to revive, tha.t is, to return to life" (WNO- I, 149). 
4, The unchanging nature inherent in all things and phenomena. 
S. The ten directions refers to the entire universe, all physical space. 
Specifically, the ten directions are the eight directions of the compast--north, south, east, west, northwest, northeast, southeast and 
southwest-plus up and down. Buddhist scriptures refer to the 
existence of Buddha lands in all directions thro ughout the universe, each with its own Buddha. The expression the Buddhas of the 
ten directions in the sutras indicates these Buddhas. The phrase Im 
directions often appears with the phrase three existences, meaning 
past, present and future existences. "The Buddhas of the ten directions and three existences" thus means all Buddhas throughout 
space and time. 
6. Substituting faith for wisdom: The principle that faith is the true 
cause for gaining supreme wisdom, and faith alone leads to 
enlightenment. 
7. Originally inherent mystic truth: The fundamental Law, Mystic 
law or Buddha nature with which aU life is originally endowed. 
8· Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism thar 
appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. 
9· Nichikan was the twenty-sixth chief priest of Ta:iselci-ji, the hea- 
temple of the Nikko school (also known as the Fuji school). He IS 
reve_red as the restorer ofNichiren's teachings because he worked t.o 
cl-ify their true meaning. During the four centuries after Nichiren 
Daishonin's death, a number of errors and misconceptions bad 
1,. N'ch'kan worktd 
arisen as his followm -plit inro many sch?°. ,1 1 hin 
He 
tirelessly 10 clarify the rrue meaning of Nich,re- ! (a( d -er 
completed exegt'SCS on Nichiren'.s five mJjor w-r;- -n 
ishc:s 
worlu, and authored The Si,c, Vo/11mt Wri11ngs, wh-c 
1511,ngul d'ing 
. 
· h' 
• 
h'no<irom m1.1 a 
the correct interpretat1oru of Nie ,ren s reac 1 ,,,. 
ones. 
Sutra do not 
10. The provisional teachings that prece<kd - -'1'.;10 peopk, and 
teach that the world of Buddhahood aisu 
. 
L-,·n...._ The 
. 
idnliud nd supenor "" er· 
instead dtser1be Buddhas as 
a 
1., 'n that inste.>d 
Pure Land (Nembutsu) teachings, for a.ample, -p ivdy dq,end on 
of relying on one's own efforts. one should CXC:, 
salvation through such a Baddh,-oamdy.Am 
d·"eren« 
• 
h, 
·1c:1: "Thae d a "'' 
If. fn "Thc Fourtmi SIJndcrs, Ni- iren_wn ··nst the inrcnt of this 
if one chanl.5 tht' daimoku while -mg -g;idi< Lorus Sutra should 
sutra .. • Afw:iys remernbn- 1M bcfJe"on"S 10 
those who keey wrh 
absoluteiy be the wt to abuse one_ a.no---- - 
c,ne who slan-
. th Lo 
S -
are m- certunJv DUU<U,.... 
- · 
rn 
e 
rus Uu• 
• 
. off-(W:-:D•l,'56). 
den a Buddha commJts - -e 
·re-Kichiren wntes: "All 
12. In "The Heritage ofrhe (;Inmate -ofLl ·.should chant -mdi.sciples and lay support- _of("-;: bodr but one in mind. 
myoho-rene:c-kyo with thespmt o 01 
to ba:o- a.s inse!>-
r.ranscending aJJ diffmncesa-ongth-wim. Th.s spinrial 
arable as fish md the wa-cr in wh-on of tl-- ultimate LrW 
bond is the bas,.s for the unive-nal mi gPO.Iof -jchj.-c:ns propapof life and <k.ith. Hrmn li<s the truth .,.,-• -rr for -pre:Mi 
·,ed.= t e .,,." ... 
tion. \1/h- you att 50 uru • \\l-0-1. :?17). 
• 
• 
propaganon can be fulfill.:d ( 
• -i..:Ju:,:n wriin; Ai ti-t 
13. fn "The True A5{>tCt of All_ Pheno-er: .;.;-o. but tht:n nro. 
only Nichirm chant.:d :-.:im-mvo- 
-te3dt.ng others. Pro- 
three. and a hundred follo..-td: cha:: re .&SwdL Doo this not 
agation will u_nfoid 1h1J WJY !-.!,.-\-\-;0-I, 385). 
signify •-merging from th;: e:itt . 
35 

fl i 
I 
!L ___ !O-n-A-t-t!ai!,!!n-in!!g-B-u-d-a-n-a-h-o-o-d-i-n..:T!:!h!!i-s-L-if1!:e-ti!!m!!e:.,_ __________ , 
'· 
trap of practicing "dependent faith," where we pin 
our hopes on having our prayers answered 
through the divine or transcendent powers of 
gods or Buddhas. This is a typical a-ample of 
viewing the Law as outside oneself. The provi-
Su 
o....--1. • 
10 
sional Buddhas of the pre--Lotus 
tra 1.-mgs 
readily lend themselves to this kind of m, the 
essence of which v escapism. 
E\lal when .tbq'Robviomlj suffi:t-. people 
of dependent fahhn,id lnnlmw • 1bm- problems. Thty dcm"'t hat the- or make any 
actual dbl: to :e:twlleoae dam-...... In such 
• 
,:,.._,.,._ i:.::.-t.. - ..,;;_,i. 
.-J..• 
c:ases,-........., ...... 11--.=,;a1aWiQ-.peo-
P.Chi& behiuc1 •ther--Aeafingwith- 
W-aihout a .sllug'le.1iow..w..,. omd dncdy 
enpteb'F,IDefGF1weee, a -IMw 
1b ase'lbeaailagy4JNDI- • ;, 4-,+;,• if we 
just walk ..,.,..,,., 1he lae -- JD«WV••lia .aad 
Defttac1DaJlr111..,,....,eznc1 ...... 
11 
Deft'taadalbe.moww.amalltiGJIQuumtime 
passes.Hwawid--am-...._,. 
can new,,...,,,...,__,•-.•nt1.w.a..and 
Mwodt J,e able to .... Bnf-+abood m this 
lifetime. 
1n addition..•• lmpodllattbat1e--=, tom 
our lives of mmpous,..,.....,and - 
lief as wdl a gmmhlicw ad- 
The 
erro.aeouabelief dm-(dleMp.. 
tic Law) msa omsideof our ha.at a- 
an inability to bdie¥e tbatd - 
and othen-possea th, B■aMba nattur.Aad Cbia 
disbelief stems from. fuodaroeatal darJmeu. 
In terms of attitude in faith, - 
feadmcy to 
skeptically regard the Buddha nature • •• me, 
ideal but one that doesn•t really change rality' 
will manifest itself as prayer that u \'ague and 
lacking in conviction. Hour eft"orts in faith are 
halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or 
fundamentally transform our lives. 
As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he 
32 
says "You must summon up deep faith" (WND-1, 
' 
Bddha 
3), if we hope to make our inherent .u . 
nature the basis of our lives-or as N1ch1ren 
terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this Jifetim--
we must continue striving to deepen our faith, 
our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-rengekyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifeSt as 
confident and concrete prayer. 
· 
· 
d at 
Because our practice of faith 1s a1me 
attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is essential that we have a solidly focused attitude when 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like trying 
't 
to shoot an arrow: without a clear target, we won 
draw the bow with any real force or determination. In the same way, when we replace vague 
yearnings with concrete determinations and confident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what 
we hope to achieve. 
Grumbling and complaining are the principal 
gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbelic£ Even if we know it is wrong, we may find 
ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of 
oursc:lves. Should such behavior become habitual, 
it will act as a constant brake on our growth and 
cause us to forget about advancing and improvingoundves. We will then effectively close off our 
own potential, falling into the path of seeking the 
law outside of w. While it might be a real chal-
- 
to stop grumbling and complaining, we can 
derive from tbe MyStic Law the wisdom to control 
these tenden . 
. . 
aes and use them as a springboard 
for positive growth and development. 
let's also strictly guard 
· 
1 
. 
fdlow 
against s andermg our 
members. Slandering and harboring resent-
=t=ousy toward others results in denying 
nature. The inability to b 1. 
. 
others' Buddha 
e 1eve m 
nature-just like not b 1· . 
. 
our 0WD--<a 
e 1evmg m 
the La 
uses us to stray off course and seek 
w externally. Our Buddha nature is what 
fiandamentaUy spurs us to reaJii.e happ· 
llless for 

ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha 
nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra 
which teaches that all people have the potential fo; 
Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly 
Warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra, 
not only won't we accomplish our desire to attain 
Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up 
committing slander of the Law_11 
In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the 
Law as existing outside one's own life tend to be 
authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and 
repress people. They are prone to emphasizing rituals or clerical authority, while their followers 
passively seek to assuage their anxieties through 
dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, taking advantage of the fact that one of human beings' 
greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes 
after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have 
come to function almost exclusively as purveyors 
Also, unless we practice together united in the 
spirit of "many in body, one in mind," the great 
desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled. 12 
Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves 
and others is the true means for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the 
potential to become a Buddha. 
The Spirit of the First Three Presidents 
Pulses in the Saka Gakkai 
A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of 
the Law in each person's life is one that treasures 
the individual. It calls out to each person, encourages his or her individual human revolution and 
seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the 
appearance of one person after another embracing 
faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily 
emerging from the earth to propagate the Law, and 
the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu. u 
This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first 
three presidents-Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei 
Toda and myself- have steadfastly follo,wd. 
That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phenal development and why our kosen-rufu 
nome • 
. 
ment has spread throughout the entire world. 
move 
of funeral and memorial sen-ices for the deceased. 
devolving into what is known as "funeral Buddhism." They offer no philosophy that empowers 
people or enables them to live better lives. 
The Soka Gakkai's founder, President 
Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a 
"teaching for transforming one's life." To believe 
that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo costs 
within us is to have the confidence that we will 
definitely become happy and attain BudJhahood 
in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working 
for kosen-rufu through shnring Nichiren Buddhism based on the conviction that it holds the 
key to happiness for both ourselves and others. 
This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and 
the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the 
first three presidents' spirit of the oneness of 
mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this 
most difficult of challenges-that of awakening 
people to the Law within. 
President Toda used to say, "You should 
resolve, 'Iam Myoho-renge-1...-yo!"' The Mystic 
Law is the "highly effective medicine" (The Lotus 
S11trn a11d lts Ope11i11g a11d Closing S11tras, p. 269) 
that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also 
33 

.. . 
1n1ng 
-
--... '(2 
'(2 W@d/ 
in Thi 
ifetime 
' 
Lecture Series 
SGI President Ikeda s 

r 

on Attaining 13uddhaltood in This Lifetime 
Those whose hearts shine with a commitment to truth and justice neYer lose 
hope, even amid the greatest hardship or 
difficulty. Rather,. they serve as a bright beacon 
illuminating the darkness of peoples suffering, 
· · 
of 
finds that ordinary beings are the enuttes 
a 
· 
f birth 
enlightenment, and that the suuermgs o 
and death are nirvana,,2 (WND-1, 4). 
· · 
f nlightimparting inspiration, assurance and courage. 
When we change, the world changes. The 
key to all change is in our inner transformation-a change in our hearts and minds. This is 
human revolution. We all have the power to 
change. When we reali7.e this truth of life, we 
can bring forth that powu anywhere. anytime 
and in any situation. 
N"icbirm BuddbisJn, based on the transformati\'e principles of the Lotus s- has made 
this gnat path of inna change available to 
all - 
with the chanting of Nam-myohormgc-kyo as its cme practic.c. 
This time. rn discuss the passage in which 
Nicbircn Daisbonin nntlines the basic attitude 
and approach to OUT fundaroental practic.e of 
chanting Nam-myoho-reoge-kyo. 
Changing Ourselves 
and Changing the Land 
As l have already touched on at length, the 
entirety of Buddbism exists within our own 
lives. And the key to attaimng Buddbabood-the 
ultimate transformation of our life-state--also 
lies in a change in our hearts, or mind.5. 
To convey this point. Nichiren Daishonin 
here swnmarizes a point from the Vimalalcirti 
Sutra:1 "When one seeks the Buddhas• emancipation in the minds of ordinary beings, one 
38 
«ordinary beings are the ent1t1es o e 
. 
. ing 
enment,, means that the wisdom for attain 
• 
· the 
Buddhahood ( enlightenment) manifests in 
lives of ordinary people steeped in earthlY 
desires. Similarly, "the sufferings of birth and 
death are nirvana" means that the Buddha lifestate of true peace and tranquillity (nirvana) 
manifests in the lives of ordinary people tormented by the sufferings of birth and death· 
Here, Nichiren explains that Buddhas and 
ordinary people are not separated by an insurmountable divide; that the only thing setting 
them apart is the difference in the "minds of 
ordinary beings.» 
Nichiren also cites the passage from the 
Vtmalakirti Sutra that explains the difference 
between pure and impure lands. This passagewhich Nichiren summarizes as "If the minds of 
living beings are impure, their land is also 
impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their 
land"'--darifies that there are not two separate 
lands; the only difference between pure and 
impure lands is "the good or evil of our minds." 
The view shown here is one in which the pure 
land does not exist in some otherworldly realm 
but in the real world, and is achieved by people 
changing themselves inside. This is a dynamic 
and practical view of the pure land, based on 
the idea of "to purify Buddha lands,, expounded 
in the Lotus Sutra ( The Lotus Sutra and Its 
Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 117). 
The V'unaJakirti Sutra passage cited by N" h' 
IC 1-
fCD is from the "Inquiring about the llln 
,, 
ess, 

or fifth, chapter. This chapter describes the 
exchange between Vimalakirtj, an outstanding 
Buddhist lay believer and practitioner of the 
bodhisattva way who has fallen ill, and Manjushri, one of Shakyamuni's leading disciples, who 
is visiting him. When asked the cause of his 
illness, Vimalakfrti replies, "Because all living 
beings are sick, therefore Iam sick."• This is a 
well-known passage that succinctly reveals the 
fundamental bodhisattva spirit of taking on 
others' sufferings as one's own. 
Vimalakirti goes on to say that bodhisattvas 
choose to be born among living beings afflicted 
by delusion and to share in the sufferings of 
birth and death in order to instruct and guide 
those living beings to enlightenment. Moreover, bodhisattvas are never overwhelmed or 
swayed by suffering, because they have established a pure state of enlightenment within.5 
Thus, the passages from the Vimalakirti 
Sutra cited by Nichiren clarify the meaning of 
Buddhahood and the pure land from the standpoint of a bodhisattva practitioner fighting 
amid the realities of daily life. Nichiren, therefore, states in conclusion, "When deluded, one 
is called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha" (WND-1, 4). In 
other words, the difference between ordinary 
people and Buddhas is nothing more than the 
difference between delusion and enlightenment 
in ordinary people's minds. How, then, can we 
transform delusion into enlightenment? 
Narn-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual 
level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can 
overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the 
root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood 
with which we are originally endowed. 
Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe 
this fundamental potential for change, saying, 
"This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will 
shine like a jewel when polished" (WNO-I, 4). 
In this way, he conveys that the practice of 
chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo--the means 
for defeating our inner darkness--serves to 
"polish" our lives. 
All living beings are inherently entities of the 
Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Buddhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of 
the Mystic Law within us freely and without hindrance, whenever and in whatever form it is 
needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life 
to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even 
though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we 
cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our 
lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a 
benighted state, we are like a "tarnished mirror" 
that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing 
the tarnished mirror of our lives. 
The Path for Polishing Our Lives: 
( 1) Brave Challenge 
In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains 
that when people's hearts change, the land or 
their external environment can also change. At 
its foundation is a transformation from delusion to enlightenment. 
As discussed earlier, what makes this transformation possible is the practice of chanting 
Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chanting as a practice for polishing our lives: "Amind 
now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when 
polished, it is sure to become like a dear mirror, 
reflecting the essential nature of phenomena 
(i.e .• the Dharma nature] and the true aspect of 
39 
