Front Matter - Title Page, Copyright, Contents, Editor's Note

Table of Contents:

Editor's Note, page iv

Chapter 1: Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—The Fundamental Purpose of Life and a Source of Hope for Humankind, page 1

Chapter 2: The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through Correct Buddhist Practice, page 11

Chapter 3: If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, You Are Not Embracing the Mystic Law, page 20

Chapter 4: Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude—Refusing To Live an Endless, Painful Austerity, page 28

Chapter 5: Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a Brave and Vigorous Spirit—Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge, page 37

Chapter 6: The Mystic Nature of Our Lives—Become the Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You, page 46

Chapter 7: Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the Oneness of Mentor and Disciple, page 54

Index, page 64

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime by Daisaku Ikeda

Published by World Tribune Press, 606 Wilshire Boulevard, Santa Monica, California 90401

Copyright 2011 by the Soka Gakkai. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Design by Lightbourne Incorporated. ISBN 978-1-935523-21-5

Editor's Note

This series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda was published in SGI-USA's Living Buddhism from the September through October 2006 issue through the March through April 2007 issue.

Please also see The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, volume 1, pages 3 through 5, for On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.

Abbreviations used in this book:

GZ refers to the Gosho zenshu, the Japanese-language compilation of letters, treatises, essays and oral teachings of Nichiren Daishonin.

LSOC refers to The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, translated by Burton Watson, published by Soka Gakkai, Tokyo, 2009.

OTT refers to The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, translated by Burton Watson, published by Soka Gakkai, Tokyo, 2004.

WND refers to The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, volume 1 and volume 2, published by Soka Gakkai, Tokyo, 1999 and 2006.

SGI President Ikeda's Lecture Series: On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

This is a series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on the writing On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime. He writes, "Nichiren Daishonin's profound teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime can powerfully transform the age and open a bright future for our modern world in the twenty-first century."
