Chapter 6: The Mystic Nature of Our Lives—Become the Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You

What then does myo signify? It is simply the mysterious nature of our life from moment to moment, which the mind cannot comprehend or words express. When we look into our own mind at any moment, we perceive neither color nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for many differing thoughts continually occur. The mind cannot be considered either to exist or not to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcends both the words and concepts of existence and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both. It is the mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality. Myo is the name given to the mystic nature of life, and ho, to its manifestations (the manifestations of the mind of myo). Renge, which means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the wonder of this Law. If we understand that our life at this moment is myo, then we will also understand that our life at other moments is the Mystic Law. This realization is the mystic kyo, or sutra. The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life, which manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law.

From "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, volume 1, page 4.

"It is the heart that is important" ("The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra," WND-1, 1000), writes Nichiren Daishonin. Our hearts, our minds, are truly wondrous and unfathomable. We can expand and deepen the inner realm of our spirit infinitely and boundlessly.

Like the elation of soaring freely through the vast blue heavens, the heart can feel immense and untrammeled joy. Like the clear, bright sunshine illuminating all things, the heart can embrace with warmth and compassion those who are suffering. And like a lion of justice, the heart can also at times tremble with righteous anger and defeat evil. Indeed, our hearts or minds are constantly changing, like scenes in a drama or like an unfolding panorama. And nothing is more wondrous than the heart's ability to manifest the world of Buddhahood. Even people weighed down by delusion and suffering can bring forth in the depths of their lives the state of Buddhahood that is one with the universe. This momentous drama of transformation is the greatest of all wonders.

Buddhism finds supreme nobility and the potential for great change in all human beings. In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," Nichiren, therefore, concludes that when we thoroughly polish our lives through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, it is possible for us to tap the life-state of Buddhahood no matter how steeped in delusion we may be, and to transform even the most impure and evil land into a pure land.

Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings" (WND-1, 3). Accordingly, through the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can reveal our inner Buddhahood—polishing "the tarnished mirror of a mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life" into "a clear mirror reflecting the essential nature of phenomena and the true aspect of reality" (see WND-1, 4). In other words, by manifesting the mystic truth that resides within us, we can tap our infinite inner potential. Buddhahood is the state of life that is one with Myoho-renge-kyo, the originally inherent mystic truth. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is also the name of this ultimate state of life.

The passage I will discuss this time explains the relation between Myoho-renge-kyo and the mind of living beings in terms of the elements of myo, ho, renge and kyo. This explanation may be seen as a description of how our lives become one with Myoho-renge-kyo and manifest the state of Buddhahood. Let us consider the profound meaning of this passage.

The Mind Is the Mystic Entity of the Middle Way That Is the Ultimate Reality

Nichiren Daishonin says that myo of Myoho-renge-kyo signifies the marvelous nature of our lives from moment to moment. And he uses the concepts of existence and nonexistence to describe this wondrous and unfathomable nature.

Our minds are in a state of constant flux, moving with the ebb and flow of countless thoughts and emotions. Nichiren notes: "When we look into our own mind at any moment, we perceive neither color nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for many differing thoughts continually occur. The mind cannot be considered either to exist or not to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcends both the words and concepts of existence and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both" (WND-1, 4).

Nichiren describes this unfathomable nature of the mind as the "mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality" (WND-1, 4). The Middle Way does not simply mean the middle course between two extremes; it refers to a more lofty perspective that is swayed by neither extreme but also embraces them both. Shakyamuni set forth a sound philosophy and practice transcending the two then-prevailing extremes of hedonism and asceticism, and he called this the Middle Way. In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," Nichiren says that the ultimate truth, which transcends the two extremes of existence and nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of truth, he calls it the "ultimate reality."

Transcending existence and nonexistence can be taken to mean transcending impermanent phenomena that alternate ceaselessly between existence and nonexistence. Further, exhibiting the qualities of both existence and nonexistence while transcending both does not refer to a transcendent or absolute being divorced from impermanent phenomena, but indicates the truly eternal that encompasses and resides within impermanent phenomena.

Although Nichiren explains the mysterious nature of life or mind in terms of the concepts of existence and nonexistence in this writing, what he says here is comparable to Nagarjuna's concept of nonsubstantiality, and to T'ien-t'ai's concepts of the unification of the three truths and the threefold contemplation in a single mind. Essentially, "the mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality" of which Nichiren speaks refers to our lives or minds that are one with the ultimate truth—a concept expressed variously as nonsubstantiality, the unification of the three truths, or threefold contemplation in a single mind.

Renge Refers to the Principle of the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect

Nichiren Daishonin next states that ho, meaning Law or phenomena, is the name given to the manifestations of the mystic nature of our lives or minds—a term that can also be expressed as the wondrous mind or the "mind of myo." The mind of myo is itself the Mystic Law. Abstract words and theories alone—be they the concepts of nonsubstantiality or the unification of the three truths—cannot be called the Mystic Law. For only when the Mystic Law is expressed as the highest human wisdom based on the Middle Way can it spread as a guide and compass, and as a teaching or Law (ho) for people to follow.

In addition, Nichiren says: "Renge, which means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the wonder of this Law" (WND-1, 4). The Mystic Law is not visible to the human eye. Therefore, the Buddha uses a concrete symbol in order to help people understand the Law's wondrous and mystic nature. This is renge, meaning "lotus flower."

Why does he employ the lotus flower? Usually plants flower first and then bear fruit—a relationship that is used to illustrate linear or sequential causality, with the flowers representing the cause and the fruit the effect. In Buddhism, this is referred to as the nonsimultaneity of cause and effect. By contrast, the lotus flower puts forth its petals and its receptacle (which contains its fruit) simultaneously—in other words, its fruit is produced at the same time its petals open. The lotus thus symbolizes the principle of the simultaneity of cause and effect.

The provisional teachings other than the Lotus Sutra do not teach that Buddhahood is inherent within the lives of ordinary people, which is regarded as the cause for attaining enlightenment. Rather, they teach that one can only gain the state of Buddhahood after undergoing countless eons of Buddhist practice. Here, cause and effect are nonsimultaneous. The teachings of the Lotus Sutra, however, clarify that all people are originally endowed with the state of Buddhahood and can reveal it instantaneously. In other words, the deluded mind of an ordinary person is instantly transformed into the mind of myo (the supreme enlightenment) of a Buddha. The lotus flower symbolizes this simultaneity of cause and effect.

Maintaining the Mind of Myo Is the Mystic Kyo

Nichiren Daishonin explains that kyo, meaning "sutra," of Myoho-renge-kyo also refers to realizing the mystic nature of life. He says: "If we understand that our life at this moment is myo, then we will also understand that our life at other moments is the Mystic Law. This realization is the mystic kyo, or sutra" (WND-1, 4).

Kyo is written with a Chinese character indicating the vertical thread, or warp, in a loom or fabric, and it is also used to refer to the passage of time. In this respect, Nichiren speaks of our lives or minds at this moment and our lives or minds at other moments. Our lives or minds are constantly changing, but when we defeat our inner darkness, or ignorance, through strong faith expressed through our chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the innate mystic truth appears within us, and the life of Myoho-renge—literally, lotus of the Mystic Law—blooms within our hearts.

Day by day, through consistently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can accumulate the causes and effects for attaining Buddhahood that make it possible to transform a mind clouded by the innate darkness of life into a mind reflecting the essential nature of phenomena and the true aspect of reality (see WND-1, 4). The virtues of these causes and effects over time become the bone and marrow of our beings, with flowers of benefit blossoming in our characters and in our lives. This is the mystic kyo in terms of our individual lives.

Also, we can regard this mystic kyo as the spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to others. When "the mind at this moment" is understood to mean the Buddha's mind and "the mind at other moments" is taken to mean the minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the Buddha's teachings that expound aspects of his enlightenment regarding the mystic nature of life, or the mind of myo. And the king of sutras that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the essence of which is Myoho-renge-kyo. In that sense, the development of kosen-rufu, with people propagating the Mystic Law and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for their own happiness and that of others and teaching others to do the same, could be said to correspond to the mystic kyo.

As seen in the aforementioned discussion, Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent in our own lives. The ongoing moment-to-moment transformation in our hearts and minds that we achieve through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo not only leads to a fundamental inner change but to a change in the entire way we live our lives, putting us on track to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. And it further creates a groundswell for the great transformation of all humankind that is kosen-rufu. The dynamic force for change on all levels is Myoho-renge-kyo.

Becoming the Masters of Our Minds

Since Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent within our lives, there is another topic I must touch on. Namely, the relation between the mind of delusion clouded by innate darkness and the mind of myo illuminated by the essential nature of phenomena and the true aspect of reality.

If we follow the deluded minds of ordinary people—minds that tend to be weak and easily swayed—our inner potential can rapidly wither or, even worse, we may succumb to negative and destructive impulses. This is a problem stemming from the subtlety of the mind. Because our minds are the key to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, we must overcome our own inner weaknesses. This is what our Buddhist practice is all about. The deluded minds of ordinary people are constantly wavering. We must not make such wavering minds our basis or guide.

Nichiren Daishonin emphasizes this by citing the well-known passage "Become the master of your mind rather than let your mind master you" ("Letter to the Brothers," WND-1, 502). This passage is from the Six Paramitas Sutra, which states to the effect: "Our minds may suddenly run out of control. Therefore, we must tame them like a wild elephant, not allowing our minds to become our masters, but rather seeking to master our minds."

The Nirvana Sutra contains a similar passage, "May I be the master of my mind and not let my mind become my master!" ("Letter to Renjo," WND-2, 5). Nichiren cites this admonition many times, making it a guideline for his followers.

Becoming the master of one's mind means having a sound compass in life and the bright beacon of faith. We must not be mastered by ordinary people's inconstant, weak and ever-changing minds of delusion. To master our minds, we must guide them in the right direction. In that sense, the true master of the mind is the Law and the teachings of the Buddha. Shakyamuni vowed to make the Law to which he had become enlightened the master of his mind, and he took pride in living true to that vow. This is the way of life of "taking refuge in the Law" that Shakyamuni emphasized in his final injunction to his disciples before he died.

The priests of the various Buddhist schools during Nichiren's lifetime had forgotten this spirit of Shakyamuni. Following their own arbitrary minds or thinking, they lost sight of the Buddha's teachings, denigrated the Lotus Sutra and succumbed to arrogance. By contrast, Nichiren taught that the true master of the mind is Myoho-renge-kyo—the heart of the Lotus Sutra and the fundamental Law of all Buddhas—and set forth the concrete practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for mastering one's mind. Also, he frequently stressed to his followers the important spirit of faith to seek this true master of the mind—the Mystic Law.

For example, when, on account of his faith, the elder of the Ikegami brothers was disowned by their father, Nichiren encouraged the two brothers, saying that this was precisely the time for them, based on faith, to unite and overcome the situation. He offers them this guidance: "A passage in the Six Paramitas Sutra says to become the master of your mind rather than let your mind master you. Whatever trouble occurs, regard it as no more than a dream, and think only of the Lotus Sutra" ("Letter to the Brothers," WND-1, 502).

No matter what difficult circumstances we may face, we can break through them without fail as long as our faith does not waver. Faith is a battle against our own inner weaknesses. Nichiren teaches that to win in this battle, we must base our lives wholeheartedly on the essence of the Lotus Sutra—the Mystic Law of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—without being swayed by weak-heartedness.

The Path of Mentor and Disciple Based on the Law

From the story of the Ikegami brothers' triumph, we also learn the faith of the oneness of mentor and disciple. Because the brothers conducted themselves exactly as Nichiren Daishonin instructed, they could overcome their ordeal; discern the scheming of Ryokan, chief priest of Gokuraku-ji, behind their father's actions; and in the end win the dramatic victory of their father taking faith.

To allow ourselves to be mastered by our minds is to lead a self-centered existence. Ultimately, we will be pulled this way and that by our constantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism and sink into the depths of darkness or ignorance. Conversely, to become the master of our minds is to live based on the Law.

A teacher or mentor in Buddhism is one who leads and connects people to the Law—teaching them that the Law on which they should depend already exists within their own lives. The disciples in turn seek the mentor, who embodies and is one with the Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, they exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. In this way, they lead lives in which they become masters of their minds.

In other words, the existence of a mentor—one who embodies and lives in complete accord with the Law, and who teaches people about the vast inner potential they possess—is indispensable for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

I had a mentor who practiced as the Buddha taught—our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei Toda, who dedicated his life to widely propagating Nichiren Buddhism in the modern age—and that has made me who I am today. President Toda is always with me as my spiritual mentor. Even now, day after day, and moment by moment, I am carrying on a dialogue with my mentor in my heart. This is the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple. Those who hold fast to their spiritual mentor as their compass and exert themselves as that mentor teaches are people who live based on the Law.

Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching founded on the oneness of mentor and disciple. And the Lotus Sutra is likewise a scripture of the oneness of mentor and disciple.

At the end of this writing, to convey the importance of the mentor-disciple relationship in walking the great path of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, Nichiren cites a passage from the "Supernatural Powers" chapter of the Lotus Sutra. Next time, I will discuss the profound meaning of this passage, but suffice it to say here that the path to attaining Buddhahood is found in the practice of Bodhisattvas of the Earth who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the Law inherent in their lives, for both their own happiness and that of others, and who teach others to do the same.

Above all, the great path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime lies in practicing faith with the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple, making our minds one with the lofty mind of the Buddha and not being swayed by our inner darkness or the three poisons—greed, anger and foolishness. Faith based on the mentor-disciple spirit is the key to opening the treasure within our lives that is as vast as the universe. Moreover, courageously exerting ourselves in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and taking action for kosen-rufu is the direct path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Notes

1. Nagarjuna: A Mahayana scholar of southern India, thought to have lived between the years 150 and 250, who is especially known for his systematization of the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. Nonsubstantiality is the concept that things and phenomena have no fixed or independent nature or existence of their own. Nagarjuna integrated the practical doctrine of the Middle Way, transcending both asceticism and hedonism, and the concept of dependent origination into the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. In other words, by viewing all things not as entities with an eternally fixed nature but as always assuming a temporary and changing aspect through their relation to other things (that is, dependent origination), one can act based on a true perception of reality, without either attachment or fixed prejudices (that is, the Middle Way).

2. Unification of the three truths: Based on the section in Nagarjuna's Treatise on the Middle Way that integrates the concepts of nonsubstantiality, dependent origination and the Middle Way, the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai established the doctrine of the three truths: the truth of nonsubstantiality, the truth of temporary existence and the truth of the Middle Way. Further, he clarified that these truths, rather than being separate and independent of one another, are three ways of viewing any particular thing or entity, and that the three moreover constitute an integral whole, each possessing all three within itself. This is called the unification of the three truths.

3. Threefold contemplation in a single mind: A method of meditation formulated by T'ien-t'ai to enable people to perceive the unification of the three truths of nonsubstantiality, temporary existence and the Middle Way. While the concept of the unification of the three truths constitutes the doctrinal core of T'ien-t'ai's teaching, the threefold contemplation in a single mind constitutes the core of the T'ien-t'ai practice. This contemplation involves perceiving the three truths as simultaneously and perfectly integrated and interfused in each phenomenon. It is equal to observing a single moment of life and seeing the three thousand realms within it. At the same time, one perceives that all phenomena consist of the three thousand realms.

4. The Six Paramitas Sutra states: "If you are always the master of your mind rather than letting your mind master you, your mind will not run amok. It is just like taming an elephant."

5. The Buddha said: "Live as islands unto yourselves, being your own refuge, with no one else as your refuge, with the Dhamma (that is, Dharma, or Law) as an island, with the Dhamma as your refuge, with no other refuge." Mahaparinibbana Sutta: The Great Passing—The Buddha's Last Days, in The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Digha Nikaya, translated by Maurice Walshe (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1995), page 245.

6. Ikegami brothers: Leading disciples of Nichiren Daishonin. The elder brother, Munenaka, was twice disowned by the father, a follower of Ryokan. At the same time, the father tempted Munenaga, the younger brother, to abandon his faith and take his brother's place as the next head of the family. Despite these adversities, the brothers persevered in faith. The father rescinded Munenaka's disinheritance and in the end took faith in Nichiren's teachings.

7. The passage states: "After I (Shakyamuni) have passed into extinction, one should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way" (WND-1, 4; LSOC, 318).
