Chapter 5: Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a Brave and Vigorous Spirit—Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge

The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas' emancipation in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands, pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of our minds.

It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena (that is, the Dharma nature) and the true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

From "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, volume 1, page 4.

Those whose hearts shine with a commitment to truth and justice never lose hope, even amid the greatest hardship or difficulty. Rather, they serve as a bright beacon illuminating the darkness of people's suffering, imparting inspiration, assurance and courage.

When we change, the world changes. The key to all change is in our inner transformation—a change in our hearts and minds. This is human revolution. We all have the power to change. When we realize this truth of life, we can bring forth that power anywhere, anytime and in any situation.

Nichiren Buddhism, based on the transformative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has made this great path of inner change available to all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as its core practice.

This time, I'll discuss the passage in which Nichiren Daishonin outlines the basic attitude and approach to our fundamental practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

Changing Ourselves and Changing the Land

As I have already touched on at length, the entirety of Buddhism exists within our own lives. And the key to attaining Buddhahood—the ultimate transformation of our life-state—also lies in a change in our hearts, or minds.

To convey this point, Nichiren Daishonin here summarizes a point from the Vimalakirti Sutra: "When one seeks the Buddhas' emancipation in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana" (WND-1, 4).

"Ordinary beings are the entities of enlightenment" means that the wisdom for attaining Buddhahood (enlightenment) manifests in the lives of ordinary people steeped in earthly desires. Similarly, "the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana" means that the Buddha life-state of true peace and tranquillity (nirvana) manifests in the lives of ordinary people tormented by the sufferings of birth and death. Here, Nichiren explains that Buddhas and ordinary people are not separated by an insurmountable divide; that the only thing setting them apart is the difference in the "minds of ordinary beings."

Nichiren also cites the passage from the Vimalakirti Sutra that explains the difference between pure and impure lands. This passage—which Nichiren summarizes as "If the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land"—clarifies that there are not two separate lands; the only difference between pure and impure lands is "the good or evil of our minds."

The view shown here is one in which the pure land does not exist in some otherworldly realm but in the real world, and is achieved by people changing themselves inside. This is a dynamic and practical view of the pure land, based on the idea of "to purify Buddha lands" expounded in the Lotus Sutra (The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, page 117).

The Vimalakirti Sutra passage cited by Nichiren is from the "Inquiring about the Illness," or fifth, chapter. This chapter describes the exchange between Vimalakirti, an outstanding Buddhist lay believer and practitioner of the bodhisattva way who has fallen ill, and Manjushri, one of Shakyamuni's leading disciples, who is visiting him. When asked the cause of his illness, Vimalakirti replies, "Because all living beings are sick, therefore I am sick." This is a well-known passage that succinctly reveals the fundamental bodhisattva spirit of taking on others' sufferings as one's own.

Vimalakirti goes on to say that bodhisattvas choose to be born among living beings afflicted by delusion and to share in the sufferings of birth and death in order to instruct and guide those living beings to enlightenment. Moreover, bodhisattvas are never overwhelmed or swayed by suffering, because they have established a pure state of enlightenment within.

Thus, the passages from the Vimalakirti Sutra cited by Nichiren clarify the meaning of Buddhahood and the pure land from the standpoint of a bodhisattva practitioner fighting amid the realities of daily life. Nichiren, therefore, states in conclusion, "When deluded, one is called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha" (WND-1, 4). In other words, the difference between ordinary people and Buddhas is nothing more than the difference between delusion and enlightenment in ordinary people's minds. How, then, can we transform delusion into enlightenment?

In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains that when people's hearts change, the land or their external environment can also change. At its foundation is a transformation from delusion to enlightenment.

As discussed earlier, what makes this transformation possible is the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood with which we are originally endowed.

Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe this fundamental potential for change, saying, "This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished" (WND-1, 4). In this way, he conveys that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the means for defeating our inner darkness—serves to "polish" our lives.

All living beings are inherently entities of the Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Buddhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of the Mystic Law within us freely and without hindrance, whenever and in whatever form it is needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a benighted state, we are like a "tarnished mirror" that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the tarnished mirror of our lives.

The Path for Polishing Our Lives: (1) Brave Challenge

Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chanting as a practice for polishing our lives: "A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena (that is, the Dharma nature) and the true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo" (WND-1, 4).

The mirror simile here is truly ingenious. The mirror being endowed with the property of reflection corresponds to our lives being endowed with the mystic truth. But if a mirror is not polished, it will naturally become clouded. Since mirrors in Nichiren's day were typically made of bronze, they would readily tarnish. A tarnished mirror could not fulfill its original function, so it had to be polished regularly.

Similarly, if our lives are neglected and left uncultivated, they will be shrouded in ignorance. The act of polishing is indispensable for restoring the mirror's innate property. Moreover, just polishing a mirror once is not enough. We have to keep polishing it if we wish it to retain its reflective property. As this metaphor aptly attests, our practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to polish our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our enlightened Dharma nature.

This practice of polishing our lives may be seen as having two aspects. One is to "arouse deep faith," as Nichiren exhorts (WND-1, 4). This could also be articulated as summoning the fighting spirit to battle our inner darkness. The other aspect is to continue making steadfast efforts, in accord with Nichiren's admonition that we should "diligently polish our mirror day and night" (see WND-1, 4).

These two points echo the two aspects of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo identified by Nichikan, a seventeenth-century restorer of Nichiren Buddhism, based on the phrase in the "Expedient Means" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, "exert oneself bravely and vigorously" (see LSOC, 56; Japanese yumyo shojin). Nichikan explains that "bravely and vigorously" (yumyo) means courageously bringing forth the power of faith, or confidence, in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, while "exert oneself" (shojin) means engaging sincerely and consistently in the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

In chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the first important thing is having the challenging spirit to act with courage. This could be described as arousing deep faith from the innermost reaches of our lives in accord with Nichiren's words, firmly believing that we can summon forth the mystic truth within us, manifest our inherent Buddhahood and attain enlightenment in this lifetime without fail. It also means directly taking on the three obstacles and four devils that seek to obstruct us from chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. We need to have a fearless, tireless and unremitting challenging spirit to confront and overcome the diverse array of obstacles that rise up to assail us. For it is precisely by challenging, battling and defeating ignorance that we can polish our lives.

The Path for Polishing Our Lives: (2) Continuing

Next, continuing is vital. It is absolutely essential for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nichiren Daishonin says: "To accept is easy; to continue is difficult. But Buddhahood lies in continuing faith" ("The Difficulty of Sustaining Faith," WND-1, 471). In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," we see the paramount importance of continuing from Nichiren's repeated emphasis on the need to practice "day and night" and "diligently" (WND-1, 4). Maintaining an unflagging practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a crucial requirement for attaining Buddhahood.

Nichiren writes: "Suffer what there is to suffer, enjoy what there is to enjoy. Regard both suffering and joy as facts of life, and continue chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, no matter what happens. How could this be anything other than the boundless joy of the Law?" ("Happiness in This World," WND-1, 681). We must continue chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo during times of both suffering and joy. The emphasis here is on the word continue, and it is key that we do so throughout "both suffering and joy." When confronted with suffering, we must not retreat. We should "suffer what there is to suffer." This is neither resignation nor escapism. We need to fix our gaze unflinchingly on reality and bravely challenge it based on chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Nichiren is explaining that this is the correct attitude for practitioners of the Mystic Law. Faith in Nichiren Buddhism is constantly directed toward transforming reality.

Of course, such a state of life is not gained overnight. But if we steadfastly and diligently continue making efforts to polish ourselves day in and day out, month after month, year after year, we will naturally and surely come to attain it, mirroring the words of the sutra passage "This cluster of unsurpassed jewels has come to us unsought" (LSOC, 124).

Next, "enjoy what there is to enjoy" (WND-1, 681), can be taken to mean that when we're experiencing joy, we should remember to have gratitude and make even greater efforts to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, aiming toward the ultimate goal of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Deepening our seeking spirit in faith is much more difficult in good times than in bad, because in good times it is easy to grow lax and self-satisfied. Rather than being someone who is strong in adversity but weak when things are going well, we should seek to construct the kind of invincible faith that allows us to "regard both suffering and joy as facts of life" (WND-1, 681).

Such strong faith is forged through our practice as Soka Gakkai members striving to achieve the lofty goal of kosen-rufu and our own enlightenment in this existence. Above all, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the process by which we "diligently polish our mirror day and night" (see WND-1, 4)—strengthens our lives in the same way that a magnificent sword is forged and tempered. The crux here lies in chanting with the spirit to challenge in times of suffering, and chanting with appreciation in times of joy.

"Continuing" is another way of saying "not regressing." Throughout the pages of Nichiren's writings, we can see his emphasis on never regressing or backsliding in faith. To cite but a few passages, Nichiren writes: "One who chants the daimoku, is the Thus Come One's emissary. Also, one who perseveres through great persecutions and embraces the sutra from beginning to end is the Thus Come One's emissary" ("The Farther the Source, the Longer the Stream," WND-1, 942); "Strengthen your faith day by day and month after month. Should you slacken in your resolve even a bit, devils will take advantage" ("On Persecution Befalling the Sage," WND-1, 997); and "Carry through with your faith in the Lotus Sutra. You cannot strike fire from flint if you stop halfway" ("Earthly Desires Are Enlightenment," WND-1, 319).

Without a battle to conquer ignorance or darkness, we cannot manifest the essential nature of phenomena, or Dharma nature. And unless we continue to wage this battle through exerting ourselves in faith, we cannot construct an unshakable state of life that is one with the Dharma nature (namely, the life-state of Buddhahood). This is because if we "slacken in our resolve even a bit" (see WND-1, 997), as Nichiren writes, we will become vulnerable to life's negative influences.

Also, when we exert ourselves in faith, the three obstacles and four devils inevitably arise. It is by defeating them that we can establish the life-state of Buddhahood. When we polish our lives on the most fundamental level through the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can deepen, strengthen and broaden ourselves spiritually without limit.

"Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Is a Diligent Practice"

Nichiren Daishonin strove to share the supreme inner state of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime with all his followers—and indeed all humankind.

The true greatness of the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it enables each person to actually manifest the same life-state as the Buddha and lead an existence of unsurpassed depth and meaning. This is clearly indicated in the following well-known passage from The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings: "If in a single moment of life we exhaust the pains and trials of millions of kalpas, then instant after instant there will arise in us the three Buddha bodies with which we are eternally endowed. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is just such a 'diligent' practice" (page 214).

Ever since our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei Toda, explained this passage to me in my youth, I have made it the personal motto by which I have lived my life. In all my struggles, I have borne these words ever in mind.

The "Emerging from the Earth" chapter of the Lotus Sutra describes countless bodhisattvas appearing from out of the ground—the emergence of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth. It explains that they have been dwelling in the empty space underneath the saha world and seeking the Buddha way with constant diligence (see LSOC, 259). The above quote from The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings clarifies from the standpoint of Nichiren Buddhism the nature of their diligence or tireless exertion.

The essence of Nichiren Buddhism is that those who exert themselves assiduously to seek the Buddha way automatically manifest the life-state of the Buddha eternally endowed with the three bodies—in other words, they bring forth their inherent Buddhahood.

When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as if to concentrate in a single moment the arduous exertions of incalculable eons—"exhausting the pains and trials of millions of kalpas" (see OTT, 214)—then the life-state of the Buddha eternally endowed with the three bodies (namely, our Buddhahood) appears within us instant after instant.

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice. Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering single-mindedly and consistently in this practice will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent Buddhahood—the Buddha eternally endowed with the three bodies—wells forth in the form of inexhaustible courage, perseverance, joy, wisdom and compassion.

Praying for Brave and Vigorous Youth To Appear

Exerting oneself means doing so bravely and vigorously. Without courage and vigor, there is no true exertion. The first Soka Gakkai president, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, also led a life of brave and vigorous endeavor. He once said to young people: "Exert yourselves bravely and vigorously! Buddhism means taking action; it means constantly striving. Even at my age, that's what I'm doing."

President Toda also remarked to youth, "Youth who wish for the happiness of humanity should first themselves seek the essence of this lofty philosophy of human revolution. They should exert themselves bravely and vigorously to fight and triumph over all manifestations of the three powerful enemies and the three obstacles and four devils."

My sentiments are exactly the same. I chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ardently for brave and vigorous disciples, brave and vigorous youth, to appear throughout the world. I am wholeheartedly chanting for this every day. Exerting oneself bravely and vigorously is truly the hallmark of the Soka Gakkai's mentor-disciple spirit.

The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for progress, the driving force for victory. Every challenge should begin with chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. No one is a match for those who steadfastly chant.

Diligently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo morning and evening, let us thoroughly polish ourselves inside and construct lives in which we win victory after victory.

Notes

1. Vimalakirti Sutra: A Mahayana sutra about Vimalakirti, a wealthy and prominent citizen of the city of Vaishali at the time of Shakyamuni. In the sutra, Vimalakirti represents the ideal Mahayana lay believer. The Sanskrit original of this sutra is not extant, but there are three Chinese translations, including one by Kumarajiva, which is the most popular version and the work usually referred to when this title is mentioned.

2. Here, Nichiren Daishonin summarizes passages from the Vimalakirti Sutra and the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai's reference to it. "Inquiring About the Illness," the fifth chapter of the sutra, contains the following exchange: "'And how is the emancipation of the Buddhas to be sought?' asked Manjushri. 'It may be sought in the minds of all living beings,' replied Vimalakirti." The Vimalakirti Sutra, translated by Burton Watson from the Chinese version by Kumarajiva (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), page 66. In his Great Concentration and Insight, T'ien-t'ai writes: "According to the Vimalakirti Sutra, the emancipation of the Thus Come One should be sought in the minds of living beings. Because living beings are entities of enlightenment, it is not something to be obtained. Because the birth and death of living beings are nirvana, birth and death are not extinguished. Emancipation already exists in the heart of one and the hearts of all, as do all phenomena."

3. This summary is based on the passage, "When the mind is pure, the Buddha land will be pure." The Vimalakirti Sutra, page 29.

4. Vimalakirti says: "Because all living beings are sick, therefore I am sick. If all living beings are relieved of sickness, then my sickness will be mended. Why? Because the bodhisattva for the sake of living beings enters the realm of birth and death, and because he is in the realm of birth and death he suffers illness. If living beings can gain release from illness, then the bodhisattva will no longer be ill." The Vimalakirti Sutra, page 65.

5. The Vimalakirti Sutra, page 65 and following.

6. In "Interpreting the Text Based upon Its Essential Meaning," a treatise of The Six-Volume Writings, Nichikan writes: "You should understand that 'to exert oneself bravely and vigorously' (see LSOC, 56; Japanese yumyo shojin) refers to faith and to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It therefore means the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo of the essential teaching. 'Bravely and vigorously' (yumyo) refers to faith. A commentary on the Lotus Sutra therefore states: 'Yu (bravely) means to act with courage; myo (vigorously) means to expend all one's wisdom.' Hence, 'bravely and vigorously' describes courageously bringing forth the power of faith to the fullest extent. Shojin (to exert oneself) indicates the practice of chanting daimoku. A commentary therefore states: 'Sho (pure) means unadulterated; jin (effort) means ceaseless advance.'"

7. These words are an exclamation of joy when Shakyamuni's voice-hearer disciples learn that they can in fact attain Buddhahood, which had previously been denied to them.

8. The three bodies of the Buddha refer to the Dharma body, the reward body and the manifested body. The Dharma body is the fundamental truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the compassionate actions the Buddha carries out to lead people to happiness.
