Chapter 7: Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the Oneness of Mentor and Disciple

If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle (that the entity of your life is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law), you are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states, "After I have passed into extinction, one should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way" (The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, page 318). Never doubt in the slightest. Respectfully.

Maintain your faith and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

From "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime" by Nichiren, The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, volume 1, page 4.

Birds follow the path of birds, and fish follow the path of fish. Similarly, there is a path for us to follow in life for achieving happiness as human beings. Ordinary people cannot easily see this correct path, but to the Buddha it is as plain as day. Nichiren Daishonin opened the indestructible path to happiness—the great path of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime—for all humankind. This path is none other than the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

The path of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is, in a sense, the most natural way for human beings to achieve enlightenment. This is because it is the means for us to reveal the "mystic truth that is originally inherent" in our lives (see WND-1, 3). Nichiren emphasizes the very natural way in which chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo allows us to manifest this innate mystic truth.

For instance, he writes (and I have inserted the italics in these passages):

"Shakyamuni's practices and the virtues he consequently attained are all contained within the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo. If we believe in these five characters, we will naturally be granted the same benefits as he was." ("The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," WND-1, 365)

"The five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo do not represent the sutra text, nor are they its meaning. They are nothing other than the intent of the entire sutra. So, even though the beginners in Buddhist practice may not understand their significance, by practicing these five characters, they will naturally conform to the sutra's intent." ("On the Four Stages of Faith and the Five Stages of Practice," WND-1, 788)

"If we do not harbor doubts in our hearts, we will as a matter of course attain Buddhahood." ("The Opening of the Eyes," WND-1, 283)

Because Myoho-renge-kyo is the inherent Law of life to which the Buddha became enlightened, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo represents an unerring practice for us to gain enlightenment. Hence, Nichiren says, "You are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime" (WND-1, 4).

We may call it the most natural path, however, that does not mean that we do not have to make personal effort. As with any path, in order to enable many people to follow it, the way has to be opened, obstructions must be removed and a clear pathway must be trodden. Similarly, the path of chanting entails a struggle to maintain faith that Myoho-renge-kyo exists within us and to defeat the fundamental darkness inherent in our lives.

When we embrace the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo, we can positively transform the cycles of negativity, delusion and suffering that our lives have repeatedly undergone as a result of innate darkness or ignorance. We can naturally engrave deep within us the causality for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Here, faith is the cause, and manifesting the life-state of Buddhahood is the effect. "To engrave the causality for attaining Buddhahood deep in our lives," therefore, is to vanquish through faith the inner darkness that is the source of evil and misery, and to bring the rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo, the inherent mystic truth, to pulse vibrantly in our lives. The life-state of Buddhahood is perfectly in tune with this rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo.

Through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the causality of Buddhahood will come to supplant the causality of negativity that has existed in our lives. And when we forge strong faith that is impervious to any attack of fundamental darkness or devilish functions, the causality for attaining Buddhahood takes root in the very core of our beings.

Faith, therefore, is absolutely crucial. That is why Nichiren underscores the importance of having "deep faith" in sharing the principle that our lives are entities of the Mystic Law (see WND-1, 4). Indeed, we find Nichiren stressing the importance of faith throughout "On Attaining Buddhahood in this Lifetime." For instance, he writes: "Summon up deep faith" (WND-1, 3), and "Arouse deep faith" (WND-1, 4). He teaches that deepening our faith is the royal road to achieving enlightenment.

The key to our enlightenment as ordinary people ultimately depends on how deeply we can believe this truth—that, by manifesting the Mystic Law inherent within our lives, we can definitely attain Buddhahood.

"Were They Not Bodhisattvas of the Earth, They Could Not Chant the Daimoku"

The kind of faith needed for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime could thus be described as faith that grows ever deeper. Such faith is truly the hallmark of Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

Nichiren Daishonin writes, "These bodhisattvas are the ones who had thoroughly forged their resolve"—in other words, they possessed "thoroughly forged faith" ("General Stone Tiger," WND-1, 953).

At the end of "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," Nichiren cites the following passage from the "Supernatural Powers of the Thus Come One" chapter of the Lotus Sutra: "After I have passed into extinction, one should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way" (LSOC, 318). He quotes this as scriptural evidence of gaining enlightenment through chanting the daimoku (or title) of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo. We can read this passage to mean that the thoroughly forged faith of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is precisely the faith required for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

In the "Supernatural Powers" chapter, Shakyamuni Buddha transfers the essence of the Lotus Sutra to Bodhisattva Superior Practices and the other Bodhisattvas of the Earth. He then outlines how these bodhisattvas should exert themselves in propagating the sutra after his passing. The above passage cited by Nichiren at the end of "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime" is the concluding part of Shakyamuni's description of benefits to be gained as a result of those efforts. Here, "one should accept and uphold this sutra" means accepting and upholding the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo—the essence of the teaching transmitted by the Buddha to Bodhisattva Superior Practices.

In "The True Aspect of All Phenomena," Nichiren writes, "Were they not Bodhisattvas of the Earth, they could not chant the daimoku" (WND-1, 385). What is it that makes the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo so difficult then? Viewed from one perspective, it is because breaking through fundamental darkness and triumphing over devilish functions requires us to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with strong, thoroughly forged faith.

Chanting and Teaching Others To Do the Same

Further, the true significance of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth's practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo lies in their not only carrying out this practice themselves but teaching others to do the same. In other words, it is a practice for both self and others.

In his treatise "The Three Great Secret Laws," Nichiren Daishonin notes that, in the Middle Day of the Law, T'ien-t'ai and his teacher Nan-Yüeh both chanted the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra, but they did so merely as a private practice and did not teach it to others. Nichiren clarifies that, in contrast, he not only chants it himself but teaches this practice to others.

The daimoku of the Middle Day remained merely an emblem for perceiving the mystic truth; it was not employed to actually lead people to enlightenment. In contrast, the daimoku of Nichiren Daishonin encompasses both practice for oneself and others—it has the actual power, when chanted with thoroughly forged faith, to break through fundamental darkness and enable all people to reveal their innate Buddhahood.

Also, in "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," Nichiren refers to the practice of chanting that he established as the "actual practice of the five characters of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo" (WND-1, 375). "Actual practice" here means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in terms of both faith and practice, and establishing the causality of Buddhahood as a reality in one's life.

The actual practice of daimoku of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of the Law means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the enlightenment of all people—a practice aiming for the happiness of both oneself and others. As Nichiren indicates when he says "At first only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three, and a hundred followed," the essence of this practice is chanting it ourselves and also teaching it to others ("The True Aspect of All Phenomena," WND-1, 385).

The Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted by the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is characterized by deep, thoroughly forged faith to overcome darkness and devilish functions, and by practice for both ourselves and others. Its essence, in short, is faith dedicated to kosen-rufu.

Shortly after Nichiren proclaimed the establishment of his teaching, ready and resolved to battle all obstacles, he composed this writing, in which he explains the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. We must never forget how Nichiren's life, a momentous struggle to spread the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo, was a succession of great difficulties and persecutions. Without a solid focus on how Nichiren propagated the Mystic Law, any discussion of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime will just be empty intellectualizing.

We should carefully ponder Nichiren's words "From the time that I was born until today, I have never known a moment's ease; I have thought only of propagating the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra" ("Persecution by Sword and Staff," WND-1, 965).

The Faith of the Soka Gakkai Is Directly Connected to Nichiren

In the present age, it is the first three presidents of the Soka Gakkai (Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei Toda and I), sharing the bonds of mentor and disciple, who have persevered in the struggle to propagate Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin. The first three presidents alone, without begrudging their lives, have fought against great hardships and persecutions like those described in the Lotus Sutra—hatred and jealousy, slander and abuse, the six difficult and nine easy acts, and the three powerful enemies. Nichiren's true lifeblood or heritage flows in the mentors and disciples united for kosen-rufu.

Now, the sound of the chant of true Bodhisattvas of the Earth resounds throughout the world. Without the kosen-rufu-directed faith and obstacle-defeating daimoku practiced and spread by the Soka Gakkai, the practice of Nichiren Buddhism for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime would not exist today.

A fighting faith through which we take on and overcome the three obstacles and four devils opens the life-state of Buddhahood. There is no attaining enlightenment without struggling against the three powerful enemies. Those who work unceasingly for kosen-rufu are genuine Buddhas.

Our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei Toda, taught us the substance of the great state of Buddhahood in concrete terms. Mr. Toda's life was not an easy, uneventful one; it was a life of painful vicissitudes.

To seek in Buddhism a life of peace and quiet, free of trouble, goes against its basic tenets. The lives of Shakyamuni Buddha and Nichiren Daishonin were fierce struggles, anything but tranquil and trouble-free.

It could be said that the genuine spirit of Buddhism lies in establishing a towering, indestructible state of life that not even the harshest obstacle can harm. True attainment of Buddhahood in this lifetime means constructing strong faith that will absolutely not be defeated by devilish functions. This is what both Shakyamuni and Nichiren taught through their own examples.

Viewed from the Buddhist perspective, Mr. Toda dedicated his life to demonstrating the state of Buddhahood of one who follows the highest human path. As his true, direct disciple, I proudly proclaim the great victory of my mentor's human revolution.

Overflowing With Life Force, Fulfilling Our Mission

But just what is attaining Buddhahood? In discussing this question, President Toda constantly declared it meant securing eternal happiness. "Attaining Buddhahood," he said, "means achieving a state of being that allows us to always be reborn overflowing with powerful life force, to fulfill our mission to our heart's content, to achieve all our goals and to possess good fortune that no one can destroy." These are words of true philosophy that get at the heart of attaining Buddhahood in language that is simple and straightforward.

Mr. Toda continued, "And is it not greater still if we can enjoy tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of millions of existences in this way?" I can still hear his voice ringing in my ears, filled with indomitable confidence and conviction like the mighty roar of a lion king.

Those who have dedicated themselves to the Mystic Law will, on each successive rebirth, overflow with vibrant life force, accomplish a mission for kosen-rufu that only they can achieve and enjoy immense, indestructible good fortune. They can joyfully savor such lives again and again.

Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, one could say, allows us to solidly enter this eternal path. Countless Soka Gakkai members have done so. As long as actual proof of the Mystic Law continues to blossom brilliantly in each person's life, the faith of the Soka Gakkai will shine eternally. Mr. Toda declared that the life of each Soka Gakkai member would be recorded in future sutras as "Soka Gakkai Buddha."

Of course, each aspect of birth, aging, sickness and death is part of the reality of our lives in this world. Our physical bodies cannot escape the changes found in the cycle of formation, continuance, decline and disintegration to which all phenomena in the universe are subject. Naturally, our bodies deteriorate as we age. If practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism were to retain youthful bodies forever, it would go against the laws of nature! As we thoroughly polish ourselves through faith, however, the inner essence of our lives will never decay.

I hope that all our pioneering and senior members who have dedicated themselves to kosen-rufu with such sincerity over the years will cheerfully, proudly adorn the final chapter of their lives with noble victory, confident of this point. Please continue to strive with the spirit of fresh challenge! Looking at Nichiren's writings, there is absolutely no doubt that those who forge such a fighting spirit in this existence do attain the lofty spiritual state allowing them to make their way freely, joyfully, through the journey of eternal life.

In describing this free, untrammeled state of life that continues across eternity and encompasses the entire universe, Mr. Toda would often say humorously: "We die, but we are reborn. For my part, I would like to come back as a stunning beauty!" He would then go on to joke that this beauty would be famous around the world, with people flocking to buy her photos and get her autograph. Of course, he said, she would never give her autograph to bad or hateful people.

Mr. Toda died at fifty-eight—not an old age by any means. The two years he had spent in prison for his beliefs during World War II had left his health seriously damaged. And the intense frenzy of activity over the next several years, which saw him work all out to rebuild the Soka Gakkai and fulfill his duties as president, also brought bouts of illness.

When a Soka Gakkai leader once asked him why he was ill, Mr. Toda answered: "My being sick like this represents a great lessening of karmic retribution. Instead of the Soka Gakkai being destroyed, I got this illness."

He also once told someone: "When I die, I think I will return to Nichiren's side and stay there for about a week or ten days. Given the fact that there are countless planets like the Earth in the universe, if Nichiren bids me to go to one of them and work for kosen-rufu there, I will immediately set out as instructed."

Such was the boundless state of life he possessed, ready to go anywhere to carry out Nichiren's decree.

And Mr. Toda yearned to share this immense state of life with as many people as possible. To convey just a single portion of the enlightenment he had gained, he often taught us that the life-state of Buddhahood means absolute happiness. "Absolute happiness," he said, "is to experience a sense of irrepressible joy in one's life every day, in one's life at each moment."

Further, by struggling for kosen-rufu to the very end, we can savor such an expansive state of being during our final days. Mr. Toda taught that this is proof of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime—proof of having entered the path of eternal happiness.

Mr. Toda, inspired by the majestic form of indomitable Mount Fuji, dauntlessly took the lead for kosen-rufu until his very last moment. I firmly believe his noble life is an example to all of us of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

The Lion's Roar of Mentor and Disciple United

Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we cannot attain Buddhahood. Through that sort of spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be expressed in various other ways, such as: the spirit of "true cause," of always starting from now; the resolve to never regress in faith; the heart of a lion king; the refusal to be defeated; faith that grows stronger day by day.

Thus Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, chanted with this spirit, is none other than the source of infinite advance. No painful difficulty or karma is an obstacle for the daimoku of lion kings. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has the power to turn adversity into a springboard for growth, to change karma into mission, to transform even sorrow into a wellspring of creativity. Nichiren Daishonin's very life pulses in Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

The daimoku of Soka Gakkai members struggling for kosen-rufu is the same as the daimoku chanted by our first and second presidents, Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda, to achieve the great desire of the happiness of all humankind. If we forget this fighting daimoku of courageous lion kings, our chanting will deviate from that of our mentors. In that case, our chanting will not produce the sound of the lion's roar, which is created by mentor and disciple chanting together. Not only will it not be the daimoku of Nichiren, it will constitute the practice of an inferior teaching that has no relation to the spirit of Shakyamuni.

We may surmise that Nichiren quotes the passage from the "Supernatural Powers" chapter in the final section of this writing to teach the solemn spirit of mentor and disciple.

Indeed, viewing it in this light accords with the spirit to always base ourselves on Nichiren's writings, which are the heart of the Soka Gakkai, an organization directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin.

He closes "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime" with the admonition: "Never doubt in the slightest . . . Maintain your faith and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime" (WND-1, 4). Faith is absolutely essential.

To return to the opening of this writing, Nichiren talks of freeing ourselves from the sufferings of birth and death we have endured since time without beginning and attaining without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime (see WND-1, 3). The purpose of our present existence is to cut the chains of suffering we have endured from the beginningless past and establish the eternal state of Buddhahood. By challenging ourselves with all our hearts so as to have no regrets in this lifetime, we can forge a state of life victorious and free of regret throughout eternity.

I know the wonder of supreme happiness and the brilliant victory of a great life.

I composed this poem at the start of 2006 with the wish that all SGI members will lead tremendously fulfilling lives. May each of you make your way triumphantly along the path of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, enjoying this "supreme happiness" and the "brilliant victory of a great life."

Let us resolutely win in the struggle to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, which condenses eternity into this present moment, and let us joyfully continue our journey of kosen-rufu together across eternity.

Notes

1. Bodhisattvas of the Earth: Disciples of Shakyamuni from the remote past whom he calls forth in the "Emerging from the Earth" chapter of the Lotus Sutra and entrusts with propagating the Lotus Sutra after his passing. They are known as Bodhisattvas of the Earth for they appear from the earth. Their leader is called Superior Practices.

2. Transfer of the essence of the Lotus Sutra: In the "Supernatural Powers" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni entrusts the sutra's teaching to Bodhisattva Superior Practices and the other Bodhisattvas of the Earth. This is called the "transfer of the essence" because Shakyamuni describes the sutra as containing: (1) "all the doctrines possessed by the Thus Come One"; (2) "all the freely exercised supernatural powers of the Thus Come One"; (3) "the storehouse of all the secret essentials of the Thus Come One"; and (4) "all the most profound matters of the Thus Come One," adding that "all these are proclaimed, revealed, and clearly expounded in this sutra" (LSOC, 316).

3. Nichiren writes, "Now, however, we have entered the Latter Day of the Law, and the daimoku that I, Nichiren, chant is different from that of earlier ages. This Nam-myoho-renge-kyo encompasses both practice for oneself and the teaching of others" ("On the Receiving of the Three Great Secret Laws," WND-2, 986).

4. The daimoku of the essential teaching (Nam-myoho-renge-kyo) has two aspects: the daimoku of faith and the daimoku of practice. The former means to believe in the Gohonzon, the latter to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and spread it.

5. Six difficult and nine easy acts: The "Treasure Tower" chapter of the Lotus Sutra explains from six perspectives the difficulty of practicing the Lotus Sutra after Shakyamuni's passing. By contrast, it describes nine seemingly impossible actions, such as throwing Mount Sumeru into another world system, as comparatively easy (see LSOC 218–19).

6. Three powerful enemies: The verse section of the "Encouraging Devotion" chapter of the Lotus Sutra describes the people who will persecute a person who spreads the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni's passing. In his Annotations on "The Words and Phrases of the Lotus Sutra," Miao-lo describes these people as belonging to three categories: arrogant lay people, arrogant monks and nuns, and arrogant false sages (see LSOC, 233–34).

7. Lessening karmic retribution: The principle that one can experience the effects of bad karma from the past to a lesser degree because of Buddhist faith and practice.

8. The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings says: "The lion's roar (shishi ku) is the preaching of the Buddha. The preaching of the Law means the preaching of the Lotus Sutra, or the preaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in particular. The first shi of the word shishi, or 'lion' (which means 'teacher'), is the Wonderful Law that is passed on by the teacher. The second shi (which means 'child') is the Wonderful Law as it is received by the disciples. The 'roar' of the term 'lion's roar' is the sound of the teacher and the disciples chanting in unison" (OTT, 111).
