Part 2: Human Revolution

Chapter 14: “Be Good Citizens!” [14.9]

14.9 Leading Noble Lives as Global Citizens

Looking back on an exchange with then Club of Rome President Ricardo Díez-Hochleitner, President Ikeda explains what true global citizenship means.

Dr. Díez-Hochleitner and I have discussed the concept of global citizenship at length. He once remarked: “A good world citizen must start by being a good family member, a good fellow worker or professional, and a good member of the local community. Starting with fundamentals of this kind has a great impact on deep reform; this relates to your idea that a single individual can change the environment, region, nation and even the whole world.”

1

This is an important observation.

Our organization has advanced under the motto “Be good citizens.” Furthermore, it upholds “faith for a harmonious family” among its eternal guidelines.

Becoming a global citizen begins nowhere else but within one’s family, workplace, and community. Let us confirm once again that it is our sure and steady efforts in these areas that form the first steps toward any lasting reform. Wherever we find ourselves at the present moment, that is the place to rise into action, burning with commitment, passion, and hope. When we ourselves move forward with new vitality as if totally rejuvenated, our local organizations and communities will likewise begin to achieve fresh and dynamic growth.

We can create a proud record of accomplishment in life by positively advancing kosen-rufu through sharing Buddhism with those around us, and by striving to help others as we make our way together along the path of happiness.

From a speech at a Tokyo No. 2 Area executive conference, Tokyo, November 18, 2005.

The Wisdom for Creating Happiness and Peace

brings together selections from President Ikeda’s works on key themes

.

*1

Ricardo Díez-Hochleitner and Daisaku Ikeda,

A Dialogue Between East and West: Looking to a Human Revolution

(London: I. B. Tauris and Co., Ltd., 2008), p. 93.

Part 2: Human Revolution

Chapter 14: “Be Good Citizens!” [14.8]

Part 2: Human Revolution

Chapter 15: “Faith for Overcoming Obstacles” [15.1]