Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 26: Leaders Who Guide Others to Happiness [26.6]

26.6 The Significance of Soka Gakkai Leadership Positions

President Ikeda explains the great significance and responsibility of leadership positions in the Soka Gakkai.

The Soka Gakkai is the organization for kosen-rufu acting in exact accord with the Buddha’s intent.

All leadership positions in the Soka Gakkai are for the sake of kosen-rufu. For that reason, they have great significance. Those who recognize the importance of their leadership positions and strive to carry out their duties with a sense of responsibility will lead lives of supreme value and fulfillment. They will accumulate eternal good fortune and benefit, and walk a sure path leading in the direction of victory and happiness.

All kinds of organizations, including businesses and governments, have leadership positions. But leadership positions in the Soka Gakkai are of a completely different nature because they are based on the Mystic Law, which permeates life throughout the three existences of past, present, and future.

Never put your position in society ahead of, or look down on, your position in the Soka Gakkai. To make light of Soka Gakkai positions and treat them casually is foolish. Those who do so ultimately destroy their own good fortune and slide down the slope to unhappiness and defeat.

Of course, organizational positions in the Soka Gakkai are not a measure of faith. It is completely inappropriate and inexcusable for leaders to behave high-handedly because of their positions. Leaders have a duty to serve and work for the happiness of the members.

Also, you shouldn’t allow your organizational position to define or limit you as a person. Remain free and true to yourself. Your faith is what matters above all. What’s crucial is your awareness as leaders.

The Soka Gakkai is an organization that exists to help people—to share the practice of Nichiren Buddhism with those who are suffering and enable them to become happy. Nothing is nobler, therefore, than serving in leadership positions in the Soka Gakkai.

I hope you will have an even deeper awareness of your responsibilities as leaders and do your best to fulfill them. Through doing so, you will gain immense benefit and realize a state of life that guarantees you eternally indestructible happiness in lifetime after lifetime.

From a speech at a Tokyo No. 2 Area executive conference, Tokyo, February 3, 2005.

The Wisdom for Creating Happiness and Peace

brings together selections from President Ikeda’s works on key themes.

Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 26: Leaders Who Guide Others to Happiness [26.5]

Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 26: Leaders Who Guide Others to Happiness [26.7]