Part 1: Happiness; Chapter 4:

“It Is the Heart That Is Important” [4.9]

4.9 Nothing Is Ever Wasted in Buddhism

When we dedicate ourselves to working for kosen-rufu, illness and every other form of adversity act as a tailwind helping us to establish a state of eternal happiness.

In

The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings

, Nichiren Daishonin describes the workings of life as being “strict [without a single exception],” adding that the three thousand realms, every single one of them, exist in our lives (cf. OTT, 22).

None of us can escape the strict law of cause and effect operating in our lives. That is a fact. The cumulative tally of our deeds, words, and thoughts in this lifetime—the three categories of action—determines the course or trajectory of our lives throughout the three existences of past, present, and future.

That is why Nichiren Daishonin teaches that all of our efforts for kosen-rufu—chanting daimoku, talking to others about Buddhism, and taking action for others’ happiness—create good causes and benefit in our lives (cf. WND-1, 4).

1

Consequently, there is no need to worry about how things may appear in the short term.

If you are ill, think of yourself as engaged in training for climbing the lofty peak of Buddhahood. Think of yourself as surmounting one slope after another, so that eventually you can stand on the summit and endlessly enjoy the wonderful view. Or think of yourself as swimming through rough seas toward a distant, shimmering island of hope and eternal happiness.

Live out your life with the spirit that everything you do is creating a record of brilliant achievement for your own wonderful eternal victory.

When you practice Nichiren Buddhism, nothing in your life is ever wasted. Please live without hesitation, fear, or regret. Never forget that everything is a tailwind propelling you forward to eternal happiness.

All rice shoots ripen within the year they are planted, though some ripen earlier and some later. In the same way, the Daishonin assures us, all people, as long as they persevere seriously in their Buddhist faith and practice, will attain the noble state of Buddhahood within this lifetime (cf. WND-2, 88).

2

From a message to an Iwate Prefecture general meeting, September 16, 1996

.

The Wisdom for Creating Happiness and Peace

brings together selections from President Ikeda’s works under key themes

.

*1

The Daishonin writes: “. . . all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of goodness in your life. With this your conviction you should strive in faith” (WND-1, 4).

*2

The Daishonin writes: “If votaries of the Lotus Sutra . . . practice as the sutra directs, then every one of them without exception will surely attain Buddhahood within his or her present lifetime. To cite an analogy, if one plants the fields in spring and summer, then, whether it be early or late, one is certain to reap a harvest within the year” (WND-2, 88).

Part 1: Happiness; Chapter 4:

“It Is the Heart That Is Important” [4.8]

Part 1: Happiness; Chapter 4:

“It Is the Heart That Is Important” [4.10]