Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 26: Leaders Who Guide Others to Happiness [26.9]

26.9 What Defines a Capable Person in the Soka Gakkai?

In

The New Human Revolution,

Shin’ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) talks about the qualities that define a capable person in the Soka Gakkai.

[Talking to high school division members in Okinawa]

“I’m so happy to be able to meet all of you.

“I’m certain that from among you will emerge capable people who will shoulder the future.

“So, what defines a capable person?

“First and foremost is being aware of one’s mission for kosen-rufu. Without a clear goal or an understanding of the ultimate purpose of your life, you cannot demonstrate your full potential. Also, even if you develop your ability and achieve high status and position, you cannot truly contribute to society if your only goal is personal success.

“Please understand that an awareness of your mission for kosen-rufu enables you to bring your abilities to bloom, tap into your inherent wisdom, and advance with fortitude and patience.

“A capable person is a person of character. Consideration for others, tolerance, self-discipline, and a commitment to truth and justice are just some of the qualities that mark an excellent character, the most priceless possession of a human being. Developing character requires spiritual struggle. It means forging your spirit by challenging your weaknesses and overcoming hardship after hardship.

“Also, a capable person must cultivate their abilities. You may have a pure and beautiful heart, but if you do not develop your abilities, you cannot work for peace or the happiness of others. Therefore, I hope you will find something that you can excel at. It doesn’t matter what it is, but the point is that you pursue it with your whole being.

“I firmly believe that all my disciples are tremendously capable individuals. You are my treasures. You are the pride of Okinawa.”

From

The New Human Revolution,

vol. 13, “Land of Happiness” chapter.

The Wisdom for Creating Happiness and Peace

brings together selections from President Ikeda’s works on key themes.

Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 26: Leaders Who Guide Others to Happiness [26.8]

Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 26: Leaders Who Guide Others to Happiness [26.10]