Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 25: The Unity of “Many in Body, One in Mind” [25.7]

25.7 “One in Mind” Means Sharing an Unwavering Commitment in Faith

Citing the guidance of second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda, President Ikeda explains the profound meaning of “many in body, one in mind.”

Mr. Toda said: “The ‘mind’ of ‘many in body, one in mind’ is not the ordinary mind, or heart. It is the mind of faith. ‘One in mind’ means being ‘one in faith’—one in our commitment to this Buddhism and its practice. That’s the real meaning of ‘many in body, one in mind.’ When young people have a strong mind of faith, a strong commitment to Buddhism, they will never be defeated.”

1

“Many in body, one in mind” is not something as superficial as just getting along well together. The “mind” in question is the mind or spirit to believe wholeheartedly in the Gohonzon, to never stray from the example of Nichiren Daishonin’s life, and to forge ahead tirelessly with our fellow practitioners to the very end. This unwavering faith is the “mind” of “many in body, one in mind.” Because we share the same commitment in faith and the same objective of kosen-rufu, we are comrades in faith and united in the spirit of “many in body, one in mind.”

If that oneness of mind is easily shaken or undermined whenever something happens, then it didn’t really exist in the first place; you were never truly “one in mind” with other members. And that leads to defeat in life.

I hope you will take deeply to heart these words of Mr. Toda: “When young people have a strong mind of faith, a strong commitment to Buddhism, they will never be defeated.”

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, December 4, 1987.

The Wisdom for Creating Happiness and Peace

brings together selections from President Ikeda’s works on key themes

.

*1

Translated from Japanese. Josei Toda,

Toda Josei zenshu

(Collected Writings of Josei Toda), vol. 4 (Tokyo: Seikyo Shimbunsha, 1984), p. 543.

Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 25: The Unity of “Many in Body, One in Mind” [25.6]

Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 25: The Unity of “Many in Body, One in Mind” [25.8]