Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 25: The Unity of “Many in Body, One in Mind” [25.8]

25.8 Self-Reliant Faith Is the Foundation of Unity

President Ikeda explains that true unity of purpose is made possible by rejecting irresponsible dependency on others and striving and praying earnestly with self-reliant faith.

Buddhism is harmony, solidarity, the unity of “many in body, one in mind.” Everyone is a supremely worthy Buddha, a Bodhisattva of the Earth

1

with a profound mission. That is why a spirit of mutual respect and of friendly support and assistance are so important. If we have this spirit, we are guaranteed to triumph both in life and in kosen-rufu. We will be absolutely unbeatable. In an environment of animosity and discord, everyone suffers. It is a state of misery, destructiveness, and hell.

Unity is strength. Unity is right. Unity is beautiful. Unity is enjoyable. Solid unity for kosen-rufu is always accompanied by the development of a more expansive state of life by each individual. This is because when we align our hearts with the development of kosen-rufu, we can break through the shell of our own selfish ego. When we have the spirit to advance together with the Soka Gakkai, together with our fellow members, together on the path of mentor and disciple dedicated to the cause of justice, we can climb the summit of our own great human revolution.

*

What is the key to unity? It may seem at first like a contradiction, but the key to unity is for each individual to be self-reliant. Each person must pray earnestly and become strong. As long as we think someone else will do it, we can never build true unity. Depending on others and irresponsibly letting things take their course is certain to result in no more than a weak and ineffectual mob.

“Youth, just one of you stand! A second and then a third will definitely follow!” In these words, President Toda revealed the formula for kosen-rufu.

From an essay series “Thoughts on

The New Human Revolution,

” published in Japanese in the

Seikyo Shimbun,

May 19, 2001

.

The Wisdom for Creating Happiness and Peace

brings together selections from President Ikeda’s works on key themes

.

*1

Bodhisattvas of the Earth: An innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 25: The Unity of “Many in Body, One in Mind” [25.7]

Part 3: Kosen-rufu and World Peace

Chapter 25: The Unity of “Many in Body, One in Mind” [25.9]