Part 1: Happiness; Chapter 8:

Facing Illness  [8.3]

8.3 Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Is the Wellspring of Life Force

Daimoku is the wellspring that enables us to face illness and transform it into an opportunity for human revolution.

My wife and I chant earnestly every day for all our members to lead lives of health and victory as they advance on the path of kosen-rufu.

Some of our members may be struggling with illness. But being ill doesn’t mean one has to be unhappy or that one can’t take action for kosen-rufu. Those who embrace the Mystic Law are guaranteed to become happy.

The Swiss philosopher and educator Carl Hilty said: “Sickness is . . . just a passageway to a higher step in life.”

1

Those who have experienced illness themselves are more considerate of others. The experience of illness makes us more compassionate. Illness teaches us many things. It makes us look death in the face and think about the meaning of life. It makes us realize just how precious life is. It is all just a passageway leading us upward to a more elevated life. It is a learning experience. And for those who base themselves on the Mystic Law, everything becomes energy for creating happiness, fuel for self-improvement.

Mr. Toda said with great conviction: “[The benefit of the Gohonzon] is that it supercharges our life force. Such powerfully charged life force transforms a state of mind in which we grumble and complain about our problems, suffering, poverty, and other misfortunes into a state of mind filled with light and joy.” He also said: “The power of daimoku is colossal. It can transform a life imbued with painful karma into one that is like strolling in a beautiful garden, or like a pleasant dream.”

When you are suffering, chant daimoku. When you are stuck, chant daimoku. If you do, life force and courage will emerge, and you will be able to change your situation. Our Buddhist practice is the engine for victory in all things.

From a speech at a leaders training course, Nagano, August 15, 2005.

The Wisdom for Creating Happiness and Peace

brings together selections from President Ikeda’s works under key themes

.

*1

Translated from German. C. Hilty,

Kranke Seelen

(Sick Souls), (Leipzig: J. C. Hinrichs’sche Buchhandlung, 1907), p. 71.

Part 1: Happiness; Chapter 8:

Facing Illness [8.2]

Part 1: Happiness; Chapter 8:

Facing Illness  [8.4]