This is part two.

Faith for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime

Naturally, the Gohanzon in itself is great beyond measure.

There is the passage from Nichikan Shonen's six-volume writings that states

Even someone who has not yet aroused true faith will still receive immense benefit through connecting with the correct object of devotion, namely the Gahonzon.

The Sokogakai, which has inherited the true lineage of faith, is dedicated to widely spreading this infinite and boundless power of the Kohonzon to still countless others.

Faith, as practiced by the Sokogakai, entails an active struggle to manifest the mystic law in one's life.

It also produces clear actual proof of benefit.

When we advance together with the Sokogakai.

we naturally come to internalize the correct practice of faith as taught by Nietzsche and Dysonen.

Therefore, those who sincerely chant Nam Yohoringe Kyol to the Kohonzon and practice and participate in activities with the Sokogakai cannot fail to become Buddhas.

The purpose of faith is to freely realize our full potential and shine in our own unique way.

That's why it's important to keep advancing and challenging ourselves to have the Spirit.

I will exert myself in my practice.

I will deepen my faith.

I will do my best as a member of the Sokagakai.

This is the certain path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

With this recognition, let's concretely and strictly apply to our daily practice the Daishonan's admonition.

If you think the law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the mystic law, but an inferior teaching.

To seek the mystic law somewhere outside of us essentially amounts to an evasion of responsibility for our own life.

Practicing the Daishonans Buddhism means not being swayed this way and that.

It means constructing a self that is solid and resolute, like towering Mount Fuji.

But if we neglect this task and focus our energies somewhere else, we can end up veering into a path of seeking the law externally before we are even aware of it.

For example, if we chant to the Gahonzon but always blame other people or our environment for our circumstances.

We are avoiding the challenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance.

By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment outside of us.

It is by changing ourselves on a more profound level that we can begin to improve our situation.

Prayer is the driving force for that change.

It is also important that we don't fall into the trap of practicing dependent faith, where we pin our hopes.

On having our prayers answered through the divine or transcendent powers of gods or Buddhas.

This is a typical example of viewing the law as outside oneself.

The provisional Buddhas of the pre-Lotasutra teachings readily lend themselves to this kind of faith, the essence of which is escapism.

Even when they are obviously suffering, people with this kind of dependent faith avoid looking at their problems.

They don't have the courage to make any actual effort to challenge their situation.

Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly engage the gears of our human revolution.

In such a scenario, quite frankly, faith has simply been used as something to hide behind and avoid having to deal with reality.

To use the analogy of mountain climbing, if we just walk around the base of the mountain and never actually make any attempt to ascend its slopes, we'll never reach the summit, no matter how much time passes.

If we avoid challenging our own issues, we'll never be able to strengthen and develop ourselves, and we won't possibly be able to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

In addition, it is also important that we try to rid our lives of general doubt and disbelief, as well as grumbling and complaining.

The erroneous belief that Myo Horengeo, the mystic law, exists outside of our life

has at its core an inability to believe that all people, both ourselves and others, possess the Buddha nature.

and this disbelief stems from fundamental darkness or ignorance.

In terms of attitude and faith, this tendency to sceptically regard the Buddha nature as

A nice ideal, but one that doesn't really change reality, will manifest itself as prayer that is weak, vague, and lacking confidence

If our efforts in faith are half-hearted, we won't be able to change our attitude or fundamentally transform our life

As the Daishonan indicates in this writing when he says, you must summon up deep faith.

If we hope to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, we must continue striving to deepen our faith in prayer.

And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as confident and concrete prayer.

Because our practice of faith is aimed at attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is absolutely essential that we have a solidly focused mind or attitude when chanting Nam Yohoring.

It is like trying to shoot an arrow.

Without a clear target, we don't draw the bow with any real energy or determination.

In the same way, our pray can only be realized when we replace vague yearnings with concrete determinations and confident Daimoku to definitely accomplish what we hope to achieve.

Grumbling and complaining are the principal gateways leading to general doubt and disbelief.

Even if we know that such behaviour is wrong, we may find ourselves doing it in spite of ourselves.

Should grumbling and complaining become habitual, it will act as a constant break on our growth and cause us to forget about advancing and improving ourselves.

When that happens, we effectively close off our own potential, falling into the path of seeking the law outside of us.

While it might be a real challenge to stop grumbling and complaining, the mystic law gives us the wisdom to control these tendencies and use them as a springboard for positive growth and development.

Let's also strictly guard against slandering our fellow members.

Slandering and harbouring resentment and jealousy toward others turns us in the direction of denying their Buddha nature.

Not being able to believe in others' Buddha nature, just like not being able to believe in our own Buddha nature, causes us to stray off course to seek the law externally.

Our Buddha nature is what fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for ourselves and others.

Not to believe in the Buddha nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra.

Which teaches that all people have the potential for Buddhahood.

Consequently, the Daishonan sternly warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra,

Not only will our prayers to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime not be fulfilled, but we will end up committing slander of the law.

Also, unless we practice together united in the spirit of many in body, one in mind, the great desire for Kosin Rufu cannot be fulfilled.

Let us confirm once again that chanting Nammyohoringa Kyol for the happiness of ourselves and others is the true means for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Each person has the potential to become a Buddha.

The spirit of the first three presidents pulses in the Sokagakai.

A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of the law in each person's life is one that treasures the individual.

It calls out to each person, encourages their individual human revolution, and seeks to lead all people to enlightenment.

In the appearance of one person after another embracing faith, we find the principle of bodhisattva steadily emerging from the earth to propagate the law.

and the unchanging formula of Kosan Rufu.

This is the path of the Sokagakai that the first three presidents

Sunesaburo Makaguchi, Jose Toda, and myself have steadfastly followed.

That is why the Sokogakai has achieved such phenomenal development

and why Kozun Rufu has spread throughout the entire world.

In contrast,

Buddhist teachings that view the law as existing outside one's own life tend to be authoritarian or formalistic, disregarding and repressing the people.

They are prone to emphasizing rituals or clerical authority, while their followers passively seek to asage their anxieties through dependence on ceremonies or clergy.

Further, taking advantage of the fact that one of human beings' greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes after

Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have come to function almost exclusively as purveyors of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, devolving into what is known as funeral Buddhism.

They do not offer a philosophy that empowers people or enables them to live their lives better

The Sokogakai's founder, President Makaguchi, asserted that Nichraendarson's Buddhism is a teaching for transforming one's life

To believe that the mystic law exists within us is to have the confidence that we will definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Faith also means actively working for Kosun Rufu through sharing the Daishonin's Buddhism based on the conviction that it holds the key to happiness for both ourselves and others.

This genuine faith pervades the Sokagakai and the SGI.

The greatness of the Sokagakai and the spirit of oneness of mentor and disciple of the first three presidents shine

in their undertaking this most difficult of challenges, that of awakening people to the law within.

President Toda used to say, You should resolve, I am myhorengeo.

The mystic law is the highly effective medicine that relieves the sufferings of all people.

It is also the great treasure storehouse that brings good fortune and happiness to all.

The important thing is to live out our lives based on and completely in sync with the mystic law.

It is to imbue and solidify our lives with the mystic lore.

Our daily realities are filled with an endless succession of problems.

But with the firm belief that our lives are my kyo, we should strive to boldly challenge everything with the unwavering conviction

that we can overcome all hardships and become happy without fail.

When we attain deep faith based on the foundation that

I am Miohorengeol.

We can take on any problem with courage.

The key to victory in life lies in whether or not we can bring forth courage

Not a shrinking timidity, but a challenging courage.

That is what we need to have.

Irrespective of the obstacles we may encounter in the course of our practice, we must not retreat a single step.

We must not be alarmed or startled by them.

The power of the mystic law, Myohoring, can triumph over anything.

It's important to be deeply confident of this.

Fearing hardships and bemoaning and resenting our environment is to live with the belief that the law is outside our own life.

So is losing confidence in our ability to overcome our circumstances and turning to others in the hope that they will save us.

or blaming others for our problems, or giving in to hopelessness and resignation.

When difficulties beset us

No matter how trying they may be, we must clearly see them for the obstacles or devilish functions they are and battle against them without retreating.

This is the way of life of those who chant Nammyohoringe kyo and dedicate their lives to the mystic lore.

The Daishonan says, Nitran's disciples cannot accomplish anything if they are cowardly.

In accord with these words,

Let's cast aside cowardice and make courage our foremost attribute.

People of courageous faith can break through the dark clouds of fear

ignorance and delusion to bring the sun of the mystic law to shine and beautiful flowers of Myohoringe, literally lotus of the Mystic Lore, to bloom in their lives.

President Toda gave the following guidance to the young women's division members in the pioneering days of our movement.

You should take pride in possessing the same life as the Buddha of the latter day.

When in life with a noble spirit, you must absolutely never depreciate yourself.

Nitran Daishonan's Buddhism starts from the realization that the supreme life condition of Buddhahood exists in each of us.

It is a teaching that makes it possible for us to achieve the most profound inner transformation, a transformation of our fundamental attitude or mindset

That's why the Daishonan emphasizes the importance of our heart or mind.

He writes,

Whether you chant the Buddha's name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of goodness in your life

With this conviction you should strive in faith.

All of our efforts in faith, including our practice of Gonggyo each morning and evening,

and all of our various Gakai activities are virtuous acts that implant benefits and roots of goodness in our lives.

Those who advance with this deep awareness will be true victors who travel the direct path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Always upholding the great philosophy embodied in the Daishonan's word.

It is the heart that is important.

Let us lead magnificent, victorious lives.

