Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude—



Refusing To Live an “Endless, Painful Austerity”

You must never think that any of the eighty thousand sacred teachings of

Shakyamuni Buddha’s lifetime or any of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the

ten directions and three existences are outside yourself. Your practice of the

Buddhist teachings will not relieve you of the sufferings of birth and death in

the least unless you perceive the true nature of your life. If you seek enlighten-

ment outside yourself, then your performing even ten thousand practices and

ten thousand good deeds will be in vain. It is like the case of a poor man who

spends night and day counting his neighbor’s wealth but gains not even half a

coin. That is why the T’ien-t’ai school’s commentary states, “Unless one per-

ceives the nature of one’s life, one cannot eradicate one’s grave offenses.”1 This

passage implies that, unless one perceives the nature of one’s life, one’s prac-

tice will become an endless, painful austerity. Therefore, such students of

Buddhism are condemned as non-Buddhist. [T’ien-t’ai’s] Great Concentration

and Insight states that, although they study Buddhism, their views are no dif-

ferent from those of non-Buddhists.

Whether you chant the Buddha’s name,2 recite the sutra, or merely offer

flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of

goodness in your life. With this conviction, you should strive in faith. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, pp. 3–4)



28

OAB_pp.28-36_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:43 PM Page 29





The character myo of myoho, or “Mystic Needless to say, the Law contained in the prac-Law,” has three meanings: to be fully tice of chanting spread by Nichiren is truly endowed, to open and to revive. 3 These wondrous. But even the power of this wondrous three meanings are all implicit in chanting Nam-Law cannot fully manifest in a life clouded by myoho-renge-kyo. In other words, the chanting ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo contains (1) the myo prevents us from believing in the Mystic Law and of perfect endowment—meaning that the single staying focused on our own Buddha nature and Law of Myoho-renge-kyo encompasses all phe- that of others. The practice of chanting enables us nomena; (2) the myo of transformation that to break through this darkness and vibrantly “opens” the world of Buddhahood in the lives of bring forth our Buddhahood. Battling our funda-beings in the nine worlds (the worlds from hell mental darkness—this inner struggle is the through bodhisattva); and (3) the myo of great essence of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. benefit, whereby a life filled with suffering is

“revived” as a life of great tranquillity and joy.

Our lives themselves are entities of the Mystic Studying Buddhism Yet Succumbing Law. Therefore, they are fully endowed with all to Non-Buddhist Thinking phenomena. Fundamental darkness and the

enlightened Dharma nature,4 earthly desires and In the passage we are studying this time, Nichiren enlightenment, and the nine worlds and the world Daishonin strongly cautions: “You must never of Buddhahood—all of these exist within us. For think that any of the eighty thousand sacred precisely that reason, we can carry out a mystic teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha’s lifetime or any and fundamental inner “revolution”—changing of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten direc-darkness into light; kindling the flame of enlight- tions and three existences are outside yourself ” enment by “burning the firewood of earthly (WND-1, 3). The use of the word never here is desires” (The Record of the Orally Transmitted deeply significant. This passage explains that the Teachings, p. 11) and thereby manifesting the world entirety of Buddhism is contained within our own of Buddhahood in our lives of the nine worlds. lives. Nichiren concludes that “the eighty thou-

The key to achieving this profound inner sand sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha’s transformation is our hearts—our fundamental lifetime” and “the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of attitude or mind-set. Therefore, Nichiren Dai- 5 the ten directions and three existences” are all shonin warns in “On Attaining Buddhahood in phenomena inherent within us. This Lifetime”: “If you think the Law is outside Nichiren goes on to say that as long as we seek yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law enlightenment outside ourselves, even our per-but an inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). When we forming “ten thousand practices and ten diligently exert ourselves in chanting Nam- thousand good deeds” (meaning all of the prac-myoho-renge-kyo based on this admonition, tices expounded in Shakyamuni’s lifetime always remembering that a change in our own teachings) and believing in the protection of the hearts or minds is crucial, the three meanings of Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the three myo will clearly manifest themselves in our lives. existences (meaning the benevolent functions of



29

OAB_pp.28-36_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:43 PM Page 30



On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood



the universe) will be in vain. Doing so is as point- the fundamental cause of the sufferings of birth,

less as counting a neighbor’s wealth, he states, aging, sickness and death—as well as in expound-

because we personally gain nothing from doing so. ing the way for overcoming this ignorance.

Nichiren then cites a passage from a T’ien-t’ai Therefore, as long as we seek the path to

school commentary, which states, “Unless one per- enlightenment outside our own lives, whatever

ceives the nature of one’s life, one cannot eradicate practices and good deeds we carry out will deviate

one’s grave offenses” (WND-1, 3 –4). If we fail to from the true essence of Buddhism. Accordingly,

grasp this point, Nichiren warns, all of the practices Nichiren says: “Such students of Buddhism are

and good deeds we might perform while seeking condemned as non-Buddhist” (WND-1, 4). enlightenment outside ourselves will ultimately

become “an endless, painful austerity” (WND-1, 4).

What does it mean to say that unless we per- To Seek Enlightenment Outside ceive the nature of our lives, we cannot eradicate Our Lives Is To Be Defeated by our grave offenses? “Grave offenses” here can be Fundamental Darkness taken to indicate fundamental darkness, which is

the source of all evil. The grave offense of slan- An important point in this writing is that we as

der—denigrating the Law or the correct teaching Nichiren Buddhists also run the risk of falling

of Buddhism—arises from fundamental darkness into non-Buddhist ways of thinking if we seek the

or ignorance. Law outside of our own lives. Hence, as Nichiren

In T’ien-t’ai’s Buddhism, it is only possible to Daishonin’s disciples, we must always bear in

eradicate this ignorance through the practice of mind his admonition “You must never think that

observing one’s mind—in other words, through any of the [Buddha’s] teachings . . . are outside

wisdom. In Nichiren Buddhism, however, funda- yourself ” (WND-1, 3). mental darkness can be overcome by the sharp The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a

sword of faith in accord with the principle of practice for revealing the “originally inherent

“substituting faith for wisdom.”6 This is the mystic truth”7 that exists in all people and achiev-essence of the practice of chanting Nam-myoho- ing Buddhahood in this lifetime. It is an

renge-kyo. incomparably “wonderful practice” (OTT, 88), in

To recap, if we seek enlightenment outside of the sense that it represents the means by which all

us, we are not pursuing the path of “observing living beings can gain enlightenment. one’s mind,” which enables us to overcome the If, however, we forget Nichiren’s admonition to

fundamental evil of ignorance or darkness. In never seek the Law outside of us, then no matter

that case, all our efforts and good deeds to attain how hard we practice, we will lose sight of the cor-

enlightenment will be lacking the vital ingredient; rect path to universal enlightenment and effectively

they will be every bit as futile as counting a neigh- wind up practicing a non-Buddhist teaching. That’s

bor’s vast riches. Moreover, because none of these why Nichiren is so strict on this point. efforts will help us eradicate our ignorance, they The essence of our practice is to perceive the

will only become “an endless, painful austerity.” true nature of our lives. To do this we must wage

This battle against ignorance is the heart of an inner struggle. If we allow ourselves to be

Buddhism. It is said that Shakyamuni’s enlighten- defeated by the three obstacles and four devils,8

ment lay in identifying darkness or ignorance as we cannot bring forth our enlightenment. That is



30

OAB_pp.28-36_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:43 PM Page 31





why battling the darkness or ignorance within us to internalize the correct practice of faith as is an unavoidable part of the process of becoming taught by Nichiren Daishonin. a Buddha. In other words, whether we continu- Therefore, those who sincerely chant Nam-ously battle our innate ignorance is the single myoho-renge-kyo to the Gohonzon and practice most important determinant in whether we and participate in activities with the Soka Gakkai attain Buddhahood. As such, it is something we cannot fail to become Buddhas. The purpose of must never forget. faith is to freely realize our full potential and shine

By engaging in this struggle, we can reveal the in our own unique way. That’s why it’s important Buddha wisdom within our lives and thereby to keep advancing and challenging ourselves, to confront and overcome our ignorance. But if we have the spirit “I will exert myself in my practice! I fail to undertake this struggle, ignorance will will deepen my faith! I will do my best as a mem-shroud and conceal our Buddha nature. Igno- ber of the Soka Gakkai.” This is the certain path to rance deepens and exacerbates the five delusive attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. inclinations of greed, anger, foolishness, arro- With this understanding, let’s concretely and gance and doubt within us. That is what happens strictly apply to our daily practice Nichiren’s if we succumb to the erroneous view that the Law admonition “If you think the Law is outside your-is outside ourselves. self, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an

inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). To seek the Mystic

Law somewhere outside of us essentially amounts

Faith for Attaining to evading responsibility for our own lives. Buddhahood in This Lifetime Practicing Nichiren Buddhism means not

being swayed this way and that; it means con-

Naturally, the Gohonzon—the object of devotion structing a self that is solid and resolute like in Nichiren Buddhism—in itself is great beyond towering Mount Fuji. But if we neglect this task measure. A passage from Nichikan’s Six-Volume and focus our energies somewhere else, before Writings9 that states: “Even someone who has not we’re even aware of it, we can end up veering onto yet aroused true faith will still receive immense the path of externally seeking the Law. benefit through connecting with the correct For example, if we chant to the Gohonzon but object [of devotion, namely, the Gohonzon]” always blame other people or our environment (Rokkansho, p. 81). for our circumstances, we are avoiding the chal-

The true lineage of faith we inherit in the Soka lenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance. Gakkai is what opens up this infinite and bound- By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment out-less power of the Gohonzon. Faith as practiced by side of us. By changing ourselves on a more the Soka Gakkai entails an active struggle to man- profound level, we can begin to improve our situ-ifest the Mystic Law in our lives; it also produces ation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the clear actual proof of benefit. When we advance driving force for that change. together with the Soka Gakkai, we naturally come It is also important that we don’t fall into the



31

OAB_pp.28-36_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:43 PM Page 32



On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood



trap of practicing “dependent faith,” where we pin says, “You must summon up deep faith” (WND-1,

our hopes on having our prayers answered 3), if we hope to make our inherent Buddha

through the divine or transcendent powers of nature the basis of our lives—or as Nichiren

gods or Buddhas. This is a typical example of terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime—

viewing the Law as outside oneself. The provi- we must continue striving to deepen our faith,

sional Buddhas of the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings10 our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

readily lend themselves to this kind of faith, the kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as

essence of which is escapism. confident and concrete prayer.

Even when they’re obviously suffering, people Because our practice of faith is aimed at

of dependent faith avoid looking at their prob- attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is essen-

lems. They don’t have the courage or make any tial that we have a solidly focused attitude when

actual effort to challenge their situation. In such chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like trying

cases, quite frankly, faith is simply something peo- to shoot an arrow: without a clear target, we won’t

ple hide behind as they avoid dealing with reality. draw the bow with any real force or determina-

Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly tion. In the same way, when we replace vague

engage the gears of our human revolution. yearnings with concrete determinations and con-

To use the analogy of mountain climbing, if we fident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what

just walk around the base of the mountain and we hope to achieve. never actually attempt to ascend its slopes, we’ll Grumbling and complaining are the principal

never reach the summit, no matter how much time gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

passes. If we avoid challenging our own issues, we lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find

can never strengthen and develop ourselves, and ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of

we won’t be able to attain Buddhahood in this ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual,

lifetime. it will act as a constant brake on our growth and

In addition, it is important that we try to rid cause us to forget about advancing and improv-

our lives of ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe- ing ourselves. We will then effectively close off our

lief as well as grumbling and complaining. The own potential, falling into the path of seeking the

erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the Mys- Law outside of us. While it might be a real chal-

tic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core lenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can

an inability to believe that all people—ourselves derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control

and others—possess the Buddha nature. And this these tendencies and use them as a springboard

disbelief stems from fundamental darkness. for positive growth and development.

In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to Let’s also strictly guard against slandering our

skeptically regard the Buddha nature as “a nice fellow members. Slandering and harboring resent-

ideal but one that doesn’t really change reality” ment and jealousy toward others results in denying

will manifest itself as prayer that is vague and their Buddha nature. The inability to believe in

lacking in conviction. If our efforts in faith are others’ Buddha nature—just like not believing in

halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or our own—causes us to stray off course and seek

fundamentally transform our lives. the Law externally. Our Buddha nature is what

As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for



32

OAB_pp.28-36_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:43 PM Page 33





ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra, Law as existing outside one’s own life tend to be which teaches that all people have the potential for authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly repress people. They are prone to emphasizing rit-warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra, uals or clerical authority, while their followers not only won’t we accomplish our desire to attain passively seek to assuage their anxieties through Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak-committing slander of the Law. 11 ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings’

Also, unless we practice together united in the greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes spirit of “many in body, one in mind,” the great after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.12 come to function almost exclusively as purveyors

Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam- of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves devolving into what is known as “funeral Bud-and others is the true means for attaining Bud- dhism.” They offer no philosophy that empowers dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the people or enables them to live better lives. potential to become a Buddha. The Soka Gakkai’s founder, President

Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a

“teaching for transforming one’s life.” To believe

The Spirit of the First Three Presidents that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo exists Pulses in the Soka Gakkai within us is to have the confidence that we will

definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood

A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working the Law in each person’s life is one that treasures for kosen-rufu through sharing Nichiren Bud-the individual. It calls out to each person, encour- dhism based on the conviction that it holds the ages his or her individual human revolution and key to happiness for both ourselves and others. seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and appearance of one person after another embracing the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily first three presidents’ spirit of the oneness of emerging from the earth to propagate the Law, and mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.13 most difficult of challenges—that of awakening

This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first people to the Law within. three presidents—Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei President Toda used to say, “You should Toda and myself—have steadfastly followed. resolve, ‘I am Myoho-renge-kyo!’” The Mystic That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phe- Law is the “highly effective medicine” (The Lotus nomenal development and why our kosen-rufu Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 269) movement has spread throughout the entire world. that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also



33

OAB_pp.28-36_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:43 PM Page 34



On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood



the great treasure storehouse that brings good accord with these words, let’s cast aside cowardice

fortune and happiness to all. The important thing and make courage our foremost attribute. is to live out our lives based on and completely in People of courageous faith can break through

sync with the Law; it is to imbue and solidify our the dark clouds of fear, ignorance and delusion to

lives with the Mystic Law. bring the sun of the Mystic Law to shine and

Our daily realities are filled with an endless beautiful flowers of Myoho-renge—the lotus of

succession of problems. But with the firm belief the Mystic Law—to bloom in their lives. that our lives are Myoho-renge-kyo, we should President Toda gave the following guidance to

strive to boldly challenge everything with the young women’s division members in the pioneer-

unwavering conviction that we can overcome all ing days of our movement: “You should take

hardships and become happy without fail. When pride in possessing the same life as the Buddha of

we maintain deep faith based on the foundation the Latter Day. Win in life with a noble spirit. You

that “I am Myoho-renge-kyo,” we can take on any must absolutely never depreciate yourselves.”

problem with courage. The key to victory in life Nichiren Buddhism starts from the realization

lies in whether we can bring forth courage. Not a that the supreme life-condition of Buddhahood

shrinking timidity but a challenging courage— exists in each of us. It is a teaching that makes it

this is what we need to have! possible for us to achieve the profoundest inner

Irrespective of the obstacles we may encounter transformation—a transformation of our funda-

in the course of our practice, we must not retreat mental attitude or mind-set. That’s why Nichiren

a single step. We must not be alarmed or startled emphasizes the importance of our minds, of

by them. The power of the Mystic Law (Myoho- what’s in our hearts. renge-kyo) can triumph over anything. To become He writes: “Whether you chant the Buddha’s

deeply confident of this is most important. name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and

Fearing hardships and bemoaning and resent- incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits

ing our environment are to believe that the Law is and roots of goodness in your life. With this convic-

outside our own lives. So is losing confidence in tion you should strive in faith” (WND-1, 4). All our

our ability to overcome our circumstances and efforts in faith—including our practice of reciting

turning to others in the hope that they will save the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

us, or blaming others for our problems, or giving kyo each morning and evening, as well as all of our

in to hopelessness and resignation. various Soka Gakkai activities—are virtuous acts

When difficulties beset us, no matter how try- that “implant benefits and roots of goodness” in

ing they may be, we must clearly see them for the our lives. Those who advance with this deep aware-

obstacles or devilish functions they are and battle ness will be true victors who travel the direct path

against them without retreating. This is the way to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. of life of those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Always upholding the great philosophy

and dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law. embodied in Nichiren’s words “It is the heart that

Nichiren Daishonin says, “[My] disciples cannot is important” (WND-1, 1000), let us lead magnif-

accomplish anything if they are cowardly” (“The icent, victorious lives! Teaching, Practice, and Proof,” WND-1, 481). In



34

OAB_pp.28-36_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:43 PM Page 35



1. Miao-lo, The Annotations on “Great Concentration and Insight.” arisen as his followers split into many schools. Nichikan worked

2. As used here, “the Buddha’s name” denotes Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. tirelessly to clarify the true meaning of Nichiren’s teachings. He

completed exegeses on Nichiren’s five major writings and other

3. Three meanings of myo: In “The Daimoku of the Lotus Sutra,”

works, and authored The Six-Volume Writings, which distinguishes

Nichiren Daishonin writes: “Myo means to be fully endowed,

the correct interpretations of Nichiren’s teachings from misleading

which in turn has the meaning of ‘perfect and full’” (WND-1, 146);

ones.

“The character myo means to open” (WND-1, 145); and “Myo

means to revive, that is, to return to life” (WND-1, 149). 10. The provisional teachings that preceded the Lotus Sutra do not

teach that the world of Buddhahood exists in all people, and

4. The unchanging nature inherent in all things and phenomena.

instead describe Buddhas as idealized and superior beings. The

5. The ten directions refers to the entire universe, all physical space. Pure Land (Nembutsu) teachings, for example, explain that instead

Specifically, the ten directions are the eight directions of the com- of relying on one’s own efforts, one should exclusively depend on

pass—north, south, east, west, northwest, northeast, southeast and salvation through such a Buddha—namely, Amida.

southwest—plus up and down. Buddhist scriptures refer to the

11. In “The Fourteen Slanders,” Nichiren writes: “There is a difference

existence of Buddha lands in all directions throughout the uni-

if one chants the daimoku while acting against the intent of this

verse, each with its own Buddha. The expression the Buddhas of the

sutra . . . Always remember that believers in the Lotus Sutra should

ten directions in the sutras indicates these Buddhas. The phrase ten

absolutely be the last to abuse one another. All those who keep faith

directions often appears with the phrase three existences, meaning

in the Lotus Sutra are most certainly Buddhas, and one who slan-

past, present and future existences. “The Buddhas of the ten direc-

ders a Buddha commits a grave offense” (WND-1, 756).

tions and three existences” thus means all Buddhas throughout

space and time. 12. In “The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life,” Nichiren writes: “All

disciples and lay supporters of Nichiren should chant Nam-

6. Substituting faith for wisdom: The principle that faith is the true

myoho-renge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but one in mind,

cause for gaining supreme wisdom, and faith alone leads to

transcending all differences among themselves to become as insep-

enlightenment.

arable as fish and the water in which they swim. This spiritual

7. Originally inherent mystic truth: The fundamental Law, Mystic bond is the basis for the universal transmission of the ultimate Law

Law or Buddha nature with which all life is originally endowed. of life and death. Herein lies the true goal of Nichiren’s propaga-

8. Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that tion. When you are so united, even the great desire for widespread

appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. propagation can be fulfilled” (WND-1, 217).

9. Nichikan was the twenty-sixth chief priest of Taiseki-ji, the head 13. In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren writes: “At first

temple of the Nikko school (also known as the Fuji school). He is only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two,

revered as the restorer of Nichiren’s teachings because he worked to three, and a hundred followed, chanting and teaching others. Prop-

clarify their true meaning. During the four centuries after Nichiren agation will unfold this way in the future as well. Does this not

Daishonin’s death, a number of errors and misconceptions had signify ‘emerging from the earth’?” (WND-1, 385).



35

OAB_pp.28-36_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:43 PM Page 36



On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood



Key Points:



The Essence of Chanting Confident and Concrete Prayer

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo The erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the

The Law contained in the practice of chanting Mystic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its

spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. But even the core an inability to believe that all people—our-

power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest selves and others—possess the Buddha nature.

in a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the And this disbelief stems from fundamental dark-

inner darkness that prevents us from believing in ness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to

the Mystic Law and staying focused on our own skeptically regard the Buddha nature as “a nice

Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of ideal but one that doesn’t really change reality” will

chanting enables us to break through this darkness manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking in

and vibrantly bring forth our Buddhahood. Bat- conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted,

tling our fundamental darkness—this inner we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally

struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myoho- transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this

renge-kyo. (p. 29) writing when he says, “You must summon up deep

faith” (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inher-

The Heart of Buddhism ent Buddha nature the basis of our lives—or as

If we seek enlightenment outside of us, we are not Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this

pursuing the path of “observing one’s mind,”

lifetime—we must continue striving to deepen our

which enables us to overcome the fundamental evil

faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-

of ignorance or darkness. In that case, all our

renge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will

efforts and good deeds to attain enlightenment will

manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43)

be lacking the vital ingredient; they will be every

bit as futile as counting a neighbor’s vast riches.

Moreover, because none of these efforts will help Overcoming Grumbling

us eradicate our ignorance, they will only become and Complaining

“an endless, painful austerity.” This battle against Grumbling and complaining are the principal

ignorance is the heart of Buddhism. (p. 30) gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find

The Driving Force for ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of

Our Transformation ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual,

If we chant to the Gohonzon but always blame it will act as a constant brake on our growth and

other people or our environment for our circum- cause us to forget about advancing and improving

stances, we are avoiding the challenge of tackling ourselves. We will then effectively close off our own

our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we potential, falling into the path of seeking the Law

are seeking enlightenment outside of us. By chang- outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to

ing ourselves on a more profound level that we stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive

can begin to improve our situation. Chanting from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that tendencies and use them as a springboard for pos-

change. (p. 31) itive growth and development. (p. 32)



36





OAB_pp.37-45_LB January-February 11/22/11 2:45 PM Page 37





On Attaining



In This Lifetime