“If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself,

You Are Not Embracing the Mystic Law”

Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law

is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior

teaching. “Inferior teaching” means those [Buddhist teachings] other than this

[Lotus] sutra, which are all expedient and provisional. No expedient or provi-

sional teaching leads directly to enlightenment, and without the direct path to

enlightenment you cannot attain Buddhahood, even if you practice lifetime

after lifetime for countless kalpas. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is

then impossible. Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge,1 you must

summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3)

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to com- vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance mune with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist and become one with the Mystic Law, its infinite practice for fusing our lives with this Law. power unfolds in our lives. Such is the immeasur-

At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the able benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

inner darkness that prevents this fusion from tak- The essence of this practice established and

ing place. When, through our practice of faith, we propagated by Nichiren Daishonin is to chant

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo filled with a seeking enlightenment.4 The power of chanting Nam-spirit to continually develop our faith or confi- myoho-renge-kyo enables us to actualize cause dence in its power. “It is the heart that is and effect in a single moment of life—that is, important,” Nichiren asserts (“The Strategy of the faith (cause) leading to the manifestation of our Lotus Sutra,” WND-1, 1000). When it comes to Buddhahood (effect). chanting, therefore, we should above all strive to Considered in this light, one’s voice chanting summon forth the courage with which to over- Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the voice of unshak-come illusion without being defeated by the able faith and seeking spirit that breaks through “three obstacles and four devils.”2 the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and

Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the ultimate sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is mystic truth, and Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the also the courageous lion’s roar that issues forth name of the life-state of Buddhas who embody from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of and reveal this truth. Thus, when we chant Nam- chanting. myoho-renge-kyo with conviction, the infinite The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is benefit of Myoho-renge-kyo unfolds in our lives. not only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is This is what it means to bring forth the world of also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we Buddhahood. should always try to chant resoundingly, with a

At work here is the principle of “cause and vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop-effect in a single moment of life,”3 in which faith ing horse. is the cause and manifesting the life-state of Bud- It can also be said that the chanting of Nam-dhahood is the effect. When we continue myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which we affirm chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo through times that we ourselves are inherently entities of of both suffering and joy while striving for our Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to own happiness and that of others, we can estab- return to our true, original selves and tap the lish as the core and innermost essence of our lives innate life force that we have possessed from time the benefit of the cause and effect for attaining without beginning. Buddhahood—which are themselves contained Nichiren declares: “There is no true happiness within the practice of chanting. When we do so, for human beings other than chanting Nam-the indomitable state of Buddhahood emerges myoho-renge-kyo” (“Happiness in This World,” within us. This is the meaning of “attaining Bud- WND-1, 681). This happiness, he says, is the dhahood in this lifetime.” “boundless joy of the Law.”5 “Joy of the Law”

In his treatise “The Object of Devotion for describes the unshakable happiness and peace Observing the Mind,” Nichiren states: “Shakya- of mind inherent in all existence. To experience muni Buddha, who has attained perfect this joy means to fully savor and enjoy the infi-enlightenment, is our own flesh and blood. His nite life force that is one with the Mystic Law. practices and the resulting virtues are our bones Nichiren explains that the only way for us to and marrow” (WND-1, 365). He explains that to taste the joy of the Mystic Law is through chant-embrace Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself attaining ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

The Mystic Law and In the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings,

Incomplete Teachings a virtually insurmountable gulf exists between

Buddhas and ordinary people. Only a very few

Given that chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has exceptional practitioners who, after having

such profound meaning, it is crucial to remember undergone austerities for countless kalpas, can

when we chant that Myoho-renge-kyo is our lives even attempt to reach the goal of enlightenment.

themselves. If we lose sight of this point, then no Moreover, according to these teachings, it is

matter how much we may chant, we will have inconceivable for someone who has become a

departed from the practice of chanting taught by Buddha to go back to being an ordinary person.

Nichiren Daishonin. As a rule, according to these teachings, the world

Therefore, in “On Attaining Buddhahood in where Buddhas dwell is not this strife-filled saha

This Lifetime,” Nichiren writes in stern warning, world where ordinary people reside. Buddhas and

“Even though you chant and believe in Myoho- ordinary people are completely separate. There-

renge-kyo, if you think the Law is outside yourself, fore, as long as that divide exists between the

you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an infe- world of Buddhahood and the nine worlds (the

rior teaching” (WND-1, 3). “Inferior” here means realm of ordinary beings), it naturally follows

“incomplete.” The Mystic Law is the ultimate truth that there is no way for all people to attain

that is perfect and complete; in contrast, an incom- enlightenment. In this worldview, ordinary peo-

plete teaching sets forth only a partial truth. ple and the idealized Buddhas are poles apart,

The above passage contains a profound phi- thus leaving ordinary people with no option but

losophy that overcomes one of the serious pitfalls to aspire for salvation through the assistance or

to which religion tends to succumb. It also intervention of such Buddhas. embodies a crucial philosophy of faith for attain- This perceived separation between the nine

ing genuine happiness. worlds and the world of Buddhahood7 is demol-

Religion is generally held to be a universal ished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of “three

endeavor to connect the human being to the infi- thousand realms in a single moment of life”—

nite, absolute and sacred. While in a sense this may in other words, the teaching that “the nine

be true, it seems that many religions postulate worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and

from the outset a separation between the secular that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds”

and the sacred, and between human beings and (“The Selection of the Time,” WND-1, 539).8

gods or Buddhas, and thus seek to bridge that gap. Here we can see the immense importance of the

Nichiren, however, regards teachings that view Lotus Sutra principle of the “mutual possession

the absolute or sacred as separate from human of the Ten Worlds.” beings as incomplete. And he cites as an example Nichiren opened the way to actualizing this

the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, which latter principle, which is the key to attaining Bud-

do not set forth the principles or practices that dhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the

enable ordinary people to attain Buddhahood in practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This

this lifetime. Rather, they espouse that one must constitutes in its fullest and most complete form

first undergo innumerable kalpas 6 of austere the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlighten-

practice before enlightenment can be achieved. ment for all human beings.

SGI President Ikeda with

Brazilian Association of

ress Municipalities President

P

o José do Carmo Garcia,

Seiky Tokyo, July 20, 2006.

Summoning Forth and Manifesting Brahma, Shakra, and the other deities; the Bud-

the Buddha Nature dha nature of Shariputra, Maudgalyayana, and

the other voice-hearers; the Buddha nature of

The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the Manjushri, Maitreya, and the other bodhisattvas;

universe. Its universality transcends our individ- and the Mystic Law that is the enlightenment of

ual selves. As indicated by its description as the the Buddhas of the three existences, are one and

“mystic truth that is originally inherent in all liv- identical. This principle is called Myoho-renge-

ing beings,” however, the Mystic Law also exists kyo” (WND-1, 887). within our lives (“On Attaining Buddhahood in Not only is Myoho-renge-kyo our own Bud-

This Lifetime,” WND-1, 3). It both resides within dha nature, he says, but it is also the Buddha

us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic nature of all heavenly deities, voice-hearers,

Law is inherent in our lives because it is the all- bodhisattvas and so on. Moreover, this Buddha

embracing Law that pervades everything in the nature is identical to the Mystic Law to which the

universe. Buddhas of the three existences—past, present

In his writing “How Those Initially Aspiring and future—are enlightened. to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Nichiren then goes on to explain that the

Lotus Sutra,” Nichiren explains the essence of chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a practice

Myoho-renge-kyo as follows: “As for the meaning in which we “summon forth and manifest” the

of Myoho-renge-kyo: The Buddha nature inher- Buddha nature inherent in the lives of all beings of

ent in us, ordinary people; the Buddha nature of the Ten Worlds: “Therefore, when once we chant

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Myoho-renge-kyo, with just that single sound we bodhisattvas throughout the universe manifest,

summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of but those chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can

all Buddhas; all existences; all bodhisattvas; all also sever the chains of fundamental darkness

voice-hearers; all the deities such as Brahma, and illusion, and reveal their own Buddha nature.

Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and In other words, it is the power of our voices

the myriad stars; the heavenly gods and earthly chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that connects

deities, on down to hell-dwellers, hungry spirits, our lives with the Mystic Law pervading all phe-

animals, asuras, human and heavenly beings, and nomena of the three thousand realms.9 all other living beings. This blessing is immeasur- In “Letter to Niike,” Nichiren further explains

able and boundless” (WND-1, 887). the significance of chanting through the analogy

Regarding the meaning of chanting Nam- of a mother bird and an egg.10 He says that the myoho-renge-kyo, he further states: “When we chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is “like the

revere Myoho-renge-kyo inherent in our own warmth of the mother bird” (WND-1, 1030). At

life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature first there is nothing inside the egg but liquid, but

within us is summoned forth and manifested by as a result of being warmed by the mother bird,

our chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This is the beak, eyes and feathers are formed. Eventually,

what is meant by ‘Buddha’” (WND-1, 887). The the baby bird breaks through the shell and hatches,

expression “is summoned forth and manifested” and is soon flying into the sky like its mother. In

points to the profound significance of the this analogy, the substance within the egg repre-Mystic Law. sents the Buddha nature of living beings, while

Nichiren uses a wonderful metaphor to the mother bird represents the Buddha who leads

explain this principle of calling forth and reveal- others to enlightenment. The chanting of Nam-

ing the inner Buddha nature: “When a caged bird myoho-renge-kyo is at once the voice of faith of

sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby ordinary people and a function of the life-state of

summoned and gather around, and when the Buddhahood. birds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in Nichiren’s most important admonition in

the cage strives to get out” (WND-1, 887). regard to attaining enlightenment through chant-

The singing of the caged bird refers to the ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that we must not

chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo by ordinary view the Law as something outside ourselves. If

people who, shackled in the chains of fundamen- we think the Law exists externally, then we are

tal darkness and earthly desires, arouse faith in reverting to the kind of divide between Buddhas

the Mystic Law. In other words, it is the chanting and ordinary people found in the pre-Lotus Sutra

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith, which is teachings. expressed as the determination to win over all

obstacles and become happy without fail through

the power of the Mystic Law. Perceiving That One’s Own Life

The power of such strong, determined chant- Is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ing calls forth the Buddha nature in all living

beings. Not only does the Buddha nature of The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has Brahma and Shakra and of the Buddhas and immeasurable beneficial power. Josei Toda, the

second Soka Gakkai president, described the infi- means firmly believing that your life is nothing nite power of the Mystic Law as follows: “It is like apart from Nam-myoho-renge-kyo!” This is the lying sprawled on your back in a wide-open space spirit Nichiren teaches in the passage, “When you looking up at the sky. All that you wish for imme- chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon diately appears. No matter how much you may up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life give away, there is always more. It is never itself ” (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life-exhausted. Try and see if you can attain this state time,” WND-1, 3). of life.”

Indeed, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can be likened

to a “wish-granting jewel.” How can we develop the A Universal Religion for the boundless state of life that enables us to bring forth Happiness of All Humankind whatever strength is necessary? President Toda

often used to say, “If you really want to achieve such Generally speaking, religions expound some infi-a state of life, you have to fight with every ounce of nite and eternal entity that transcends both human your being for the Lotus Sutra, for kosen-rufu!” beings and the impermanence of this world, using

Such was the vast and untrammeled spirit of such terms as God or law. Different religions regard my mentor: the spirit to strive forever together this infinite and eternal entity variously as a source with the Buddhas of the three existences and with of fear and awe, an object of adoration, a great void the life-affirming functions of the universe such of emptiness or a wellspring of all-embracing love. as Brahma and Shakra, wherever in the universe Nichiren Daishonin saw the power of the we might find ourselves; the spirit to actualize a Mystic Law that encompasses and sustains all world of happiness and peace dedicated to value things in the universe as existing within human creation, by helping people overcome misery and beings, and he established a means for actually misfortune and the sufferings of birth, aging, manifesting that Law in their lives. sickness and death. During my second lecture at Harvard Univer-

Throughout everything, Mr. Toda steadfastly sity (in September 1993), I proposed three areas continued to seek the Law that exists nowhere where Mahayana Buddhism could contribute to but within our own lives. And he stressed the modern civilization: (1) in fostering the creation importance of living true to oneself. His starting of peace; (2) in paving the way toward the restora-point was his profound realization in prison that tion and rejuvenation of humanity; and (3) in the Buddha is life itself and his awakening to his providing a philosophical basis for the symbiotic identity as a Bodhisattva of the Earth. coexistence of all things. In connection with the

He also often spoke of the spirit of faith second point, I stressed the important significance we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law with- of the approach of Nichiren Buddhism, which in us, saying: “You have to be resolved that teaches neither an exclusive reliance on the “power Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is your own life!” or of self ” nor on the “power of other.” This perspec-“Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day tive has resonated deeply with many scholars.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Only by communing and fusing with the neither exclusively on the power of other nor on

power of other—which is eternal and transcends the power of self, we can manifest the power that

our limited, finite selves—can we wholly activate exists within us yet transcends our selves. Chant-

the power of self. At the same time, however, this ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to do this.

eternal, all-encompassing power of other actually In this way, Nichiren Buddhism opens up a

exists inherently in our lives. Nichiren writes:

broad new vision of a universal religion for the

“People are certainly self-empowered, and yet

happiness of all humankind—one that tran-

they are not self-empowered . . . People are cer-

tainly other-empowered, and yet they are not scends the approach of teachings that strictly

other-empowered” (“The Meaning of the Sacred divide external power and the individual’s own

Teachings of the Buddha’s Lifetime,” WND-2, power and that emphasize one over the other.

62). 11 What this means, I believe, is that by relying

1. “Chant myoho and recite renge” means chanting the daimoku, or making it possible to interpret them as potential states of life inher-

name or title, of the Mystic Law—Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. ent in each individual being.

2. Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that 8. “The nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and Buddha-

appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. hood retains the nine worlds”: This means that that the lives of

3. Cause and effect in a single moment of life: This principle teaches beings in the nine worlds—the worlds from hell through to bodhi-

that the cause and effect of attaining Buddhahood exist in the lives sattva—are endowed with the world of Buddhahood, and that the

of all people at each moment. Faith and practice based on the Mys- lives of Buddhas are also endowed with the nine worlds. In other

tic Law are the causes that instantly enable us to attain Buddhahood words, ordinary people and Buddhas are essentially the same with

and manifest the virtues of the world of Buddhahood inherent in no distinction between them.

our lives. 9. Three thousand realms in a single moment of life is a philosophical

4. Embracing Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself enlightenment: The Mys- system established by T’ien-t’ai. The “three thousand realms” indi-

tic Law is the fundamental Law by which all Buddhas throughout cates the varying aspects and phases that life assumes at each

past, present and future attain enlightenment. Nichiren perceived moment. At each moment, life manifests one of the Ten Worlds.

the Mystic Law in his own life and manifested it in the concrete Each of these worlds possesses the potential for all ten within itself,

form of the Gohonzon, the object of fundamental devotion. thus making one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith in this Gohonzon worlds possesses the ten factors and operates within each of the

constitutes the practice of observing one’s mind in order to attain three realms of existence, thus making three thousand realms.

Buddhahood by perceiving the Mystic Law within one’s own life. 10.Nichiren Daishonin writes: “A bird’s egg contains nothing but liq-

This is the principle of “embracing the Gohonzon is in itself uid, yet by itself this develops into a beak, two eyes, and all the

attaining enlightenment.” other parts, and the bird soars into the sky. We, too, are the eggs of

5. Boundless joy of the Law: This refers to the benefit one obtains from ignorance, which are pitiful things, but when nurtured by the

embracing the Mystic Law. It describes the enlightened state of a chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which is like the warmth of

Buddha. In his writing “Happiness in This World,” Nichiren states: the mother bird, we develop the beak of the thirty-two features

“There is no true happiness for human beings other than chanting and the feathers of the eighty characteristics [of the Buddha] and

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The [Lotus] sutra reads, ‘…where living are free to soar into the sky of the true aspect of all phenomena

beings enjoy themselves at ease’ [The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and the reality of all things” (“Letter to Niike,” WND-1, 1030).

and Closing Sutras, p. 272]. How could this passage mean anything 11.Nichiren Daishonin states: “Now in the teachings of the Lotus

but the boundless joy of the Law?” (WND-1, 681). Sutra, people are certainly self-empowered, and yet they are not

6. An extremely long period of time. Sutras and treatises differ in their self-empowered. This is because one’s own self, or life, at the same

definitions, but kalpas fall into two major categories, those of meas- time possesses the nature of all living beings in the Ten Worlds.

urable and immeasurable duration. One explanation sets the length Therefore this self has from the beginning been in the possession of

of a small kalpa at approximately sixteen million years. According one’s own realm of Buddhahood and of the realms of Buddhahood

to Buddhist cosmology, a world repeatedly undergoes four stages: possessed by all other living beings. Therefore when one attains

formation, continuance, decline and disintegration. Each of these Buddhahood one does not take on some new or ‘other’ Buddha

four stages lasts for twenty small kalpas and is equal to one medium identity.

kalpa. Finally, one complete cycle forms a major kalpa. “Again, in the teachings of the Lotus Sutra, people are certainly

7. The Ten Worlds are ten distinct realms or categories of beings other-empowered, and yet they are not other-empowered. The

referred to in Buddhist scriptures. From the lowest to the highest, Buddhas, who are considered separate from us, are actually con-

the realms of (1) hell, (2) hungry spirits, (3) animals, (4) asuras, (5) tained within our own selves, or the lives of us ordinary people.

human beings, (6) heavenly beings, (7) voice-hearers, (8) cause- Those Buddhas manifest the realms of Buddhahood of all living

awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and (10) Buddhas. The Lotus beings in the same manner as we do” (“The Sacred Teachings of the

Sutra teaches that each of the Ten Worlds contains all ten within it, Buddha’s Lifetime,” WND-2, 62).

Key Points Bridging the Gap Between

Buddhas and Ordinary People

This perceived separation between the nine worlds

and the world of Buddhahood is demolished by

The Meaning of Chanting the Lotus Sutra doctrine of “three thousand realms

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in a single moment of life”—in other words, the

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to commune teaching that “the nine worlds have the potential

with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist practice for for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the

fusing our lives with this Law. At the same time, it nine worlds” (“The Selection of the Time,” WND-1,

is a battle to conquer the inner darkness that pre- 539). Here we can see the immense importance of

vents this fusion from taking place. When, through the Lotus Sutra principle of the “mutual possession

our practice of faith, we vanquish this darkness of of the Ten Worlds.” Nichiren opened the way to

illusion and ignorance and become one with the actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to

Mystic Law, its infinite power unfolds in our lives. attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by estab-

Such is the immeasurable benefit of chanting lishing the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (p. 20) renge-kyo. This constitutes in its fullest and most

complete form the teaching of Buddhism that

The Cause and Effect of seeks enlightenment for all human beings. (p. 22)

Attaining Buddhahood

The power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Manifesting Our Inner Power enables us to actualize cause and effect in a single That Transcends Us

moment of life—that is, faith (cause) leading to The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the uni-

the manifestation of our Buddhahood (effect). verse. Its universality transcends our individual

Considered in this light, one’s voice chanting selves. As indicated by its description as the “mystic

Nam-myoho- renge-kyo is the voice of unshakable truth that is originally inherent in all living beings,”

faith and seeking spirit that breaks through the however, the Mystic Law also exists within our lives

inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,”

sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is WND-1, 3). It both resides within us and transcends

also the courageous lion’s roar that issues forth us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in

from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of our lives because it is the all-embracing Law that

chanting. (p. 21) pervades everything in the universe. (p. 23)

Chanting Like a Galloping Horse Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is not Is Your Own Life! only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is also [Mr. Toda] also often spoke of the spirit of faith we

the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law within us,

should always try to chant resoundingly, with a saying: “You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho-

vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop- renge-kyo is your own life!” or “Propagating the

ing horse. It can also be said that the chanting Mystic Law in the Latter Day means firmly believing

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myoho-

we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities renge-kyo!” This is the spirit Nichiren teaches in the

of Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to passage, “When you chant myoho and recite renge, return to our true, original selves and tap the you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-

innate life force that we have possessed from time kyo is your life itself” (“On Attaining Buddhahood in

without beginning. (p. 21) This Lifetime,” WND-1, 3). (p. 25)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime