Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—

The Fundamental Purpose of Life and

a Source of Hope for Humankind

If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have

endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed

enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is orig-

inally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting

Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate

in all life. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3)

Just what constitutes a deeply meaningful life? attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime was a What is true happiness? Nichiren Buddhism revolutionary concept that turned prevailing is a teaching of hope that enables us to forge Buddhist thought on its head. Indeed, it con-a state of unsurpassed and indestructible happi-tinues to shine today as a principle that can ness and to lead a life of supreme value, while powerfully transform the age and open a bright also helping others do the same. future for our modern world in the twenty-first

All people have the potential to attain century. Buddhahood; moreover, they can gain that lofty Therefore, I look forward to studying state just as they are and in fact are assured Nichiren’s writing “On Attaining Buddhahood in of being able to do so in this lifetime. Nichiren This Lifetime” together with you, as we embark in Buddhism clearly elucidates this wonderful path high spirits on a new journey of growth and to enlightenment. development toward the Soka Gakkai’s eightieth

Nichiren Daishonin’s profound teaching of anniversary (in 2010).

The Profound Meaning of darkness—a battle against the negative and

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo destructive forces within us. It means that

through the power of faith—in other words,

“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime” is through strengthening our conviction that we

an important writing that clarifies the basic possess the Buddha nature—we can break

theory and practice of Nichiren Buddhism. SGI through the darkness obscuring this awareness,

members throughout the globe have deepened thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood.

their understanding of the essence of Nichiren Chanting in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers

Daishonin’s teachings by earnestly studying this to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves

writing as a guideline for practice and study. and also teaching it to others. It means making

Although the original is no longer extant and efforts in word and deed for our own and others’

the precise date and name of the recipient are happiness in the course of our spiritual struggle

unknown, this letter is traditionally thought to against inner negativity and illusion. have been written around 1255 and addressed to When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we

Toki Jonin.1 The assertion that it was composed are both chanting the name of, and calling forth,

in 1255, shortly after Nichiren publicly declared the Buddha nature in our own lives and the lives

his teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in 1253, is of others. Through applying our practice of faith

credible in view of the letter’s content, explaining to win over doubt and delusion, the power of our

as it does the significance of chanting Nam- inherent Buddha nature is called forth by the

myoho-renge-kyo in terms of both theory and sound of our chanting and spontaneously mani-

practice. fests in our lives.2

The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge- The key point that sets Nichiren Buddhism

kyo is the foundation of Nichiren’s lifetime of apart from the other Buddhist schools of his day

teachings. Nichiren Buddhism, unlike the estab- was the establishment of this concrete means

lished Buddhist schools of his day, was not for attaining Buddhahood. And from the time he

dedicated to the worship of a specific god or Bud- first declared Nam-myoho-renge-kyo until the

dha. Nichiren established the means for all people moment of his death, Nichiren ardently strove to

to achieve enlightenment, the ideal of the Lotus teach this supreme path of enlightenment to peo-

Sutra, by formulating the practice of chanting ple throughout the land. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which enables us to acti- In the opening passage of “On Attaining Bud-

vate our inherent Buddha nature and manifest it dhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren clearly and

as the life-state of Buddhahood. fully articulates the basic philosophy of enlight-

In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam- enment that lies at the heart of his teaching,

myoho-renge-kyo has two aspects: the chanting which exists for the happiness of all humanity: “If

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of

chanting in terms of practice. Chanting in terms birth and death you have endured since time

of faith refers to the spiritual aspect of our prac- without beginning and to attain without fail

tice. This essentially consists of the struggle we unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you

wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or must perceive the mystic truth that is originally

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho- by manifesting within us the mystic truth inher-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will ent in all living beings, we can free ourselves from therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth the endless sufferings of birth and death. The innate in all life” (WND-1, 3). name of that mystic truth is Myoho-renge-kyo,

We’ll discuss the profound meaning of this and the way to manifest it is through chanting passage in detail next time. But briefly, it says that Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

The Significance of Our Existence as Human Beings

Nevertheless, even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you

think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but

an inferior teaching. (WND-1, 3)

The concept of attaining Buddhahood in life-state of Buddhahood is at one with the eter-this lifetime refers to ordinary people nal Mystic Law and abounds with infinite wisdom becoming enlightened during the course and compassion, it tended to be seen as some-of their present existences. By extension, it means thing completely separate and removed from the that they can achieve this just as they are. As such, lives of ordinary people steeped in illusion.

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime means Attaining enlightenment was thought to require the same thing as attaining Buddhahood in one’s overcoming the unfathomably deep chasm

present form, which is the Lotus Sutra’s approach between the spiritual states of a Buddha and ordi-to Buddhahood and illustrated by the example nary people, and this gave rise to the idea that it

of the dragon king’s daughter3 in the sutra’s was necessary to carry out austere practices for “Devadatta” chapter. innumerable kalpas.4

This view contrasts sharply with the pre- Nichiren Buddhism clarifies that it is specifi-

Lotus Sutra teachings, which expound that one cally in this present existence, in which we have can become enlightened only after practicing been born as human beings, that we can actualize

austerities over countless lifetimes. Because the the principle of attaining Buddhahood in one’s

SGI President Ikeda

ress at Soka University, P

o Hachioji, Tokyo, Seiky on May 5, 2006.

present form as explained in the Lotus Sutra. And Will we transmigrate forever along the paths of

Nichiren Daishonin reveals how to actualize this evil, or can we succeed in directing our lives into

profound teaching. an orbit of good?

Drawing an analogy to rice crops, Nichiren As evidenced in many of his writings,

notes that while some ripen early and some ripen Nichiren repeatedly stresses the crucial impor-

late, they will all mature and be ready for harvest tance of the heart, or mind. In this inner realm of

within the year. He explains that votaries of the life, the potential resides for dramatic shifts from

Lotus Sutra will likewise attain Buddhahood in evil to good or from good to evil. That is why

this existence without fail.5 Nichiren’s teaching of enlightenment can be

Nichiren places importance on the present viewed as a process that begins with inner change.

lifetime of human beings. Of course, not only In other words, through the power of faith, we

humans but also all living beings possess the can defeat the negative functions inside us that Buddha nature and have the potential to attain are governed by the fundamental darkness in all

Buddhahood in their present form, but Nichiren’s human hearts and manifest the positive functions

focus is always first and foremost on the happi- of life that are one with the Dharma nature—our

ness of human beings. Buddhahood.

The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted This present lifetime, in which we have been

and rich; it has the capacity for magnificent born as human beings, represents a golden

achievement. For that very reason, the heart often opportunity to ensure that our lives no longer

undergoes great suffering and torment, and can transmigrate along the evil paths but instead

become trapped in an endless, downward spiral. traverse the paths of good.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Emphasis on Inner Change

Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon up deep

faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. (WND-1, 3)

Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How

should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (WND-1, 4)

In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life- Nichiren explains that the key to chanting time,” Nichiren Daishonin thoroughly explains Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is summoning up deep that we cannot achieve enlightenment without faith, or confidence, in the existence of our innate a profound change in our lives, in our hearts and Buddhahood. He declares that when we do so, we minds. can polish our lives and reveal our enlightenment,

First, he writes that the mystic truth with which writing: “Therefore, when you chant myoho and all living beings are endowed reveals “the principle recite renge [that is, chant Nam-myoho-renge-of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single kyo], you must summon up deep faith that moment of life and all phenomena” (WND-1, 3). Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself [literally, What this means is that our lives or our minds at your mind at each moment]” (WND-1, 3). He each moment both embody all phenomena and continues: “Arouse deep faith, and diligently pervade all phenomena. This could be described as polish your mirror day and night. How should you a life-state of oneness with the universe. polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

Also, Nichiren warns that if we seek the Mystic kyo” (WND-1, 4). Law outside ourselves, then no matter how much In addition, Nichiren speaks of “the mystic we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we cannot entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate manifest the condition of enlightenment; on the reality” (WND-1, 4)—in other words, the mystic, contrary, our Buddhist practice will only “become inscrutable nature of life, of our hearts and an endless, painful austerity” (WND-1, 4). He minds, that manifests as Buddhahood. Here, he clearly states: “Even though you chant and believe indicates that Myoho-renge-kyo is the wonderful in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is out- law of life, of the inner realm of our beings. side yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic On that basis, he asserts that when we chant Law but an inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in the

Mystic Law, we can reveal our Buddhahood in this of all of us living beings, that is not so. On the

lifetime. Nichiren writes: “The Lotus Sutra is the contrary, it is common mortals who endow him

king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for with the three virtues” (WND-1, 384). This pas-

it explains that the entity of our life [literally, our sage describes a shift from an authoritarian to a

mind or inner reality], which manifests either good humanistic, people-centered religion.6 The or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the teaching of Nichiren, who established the con-

Mystic Law. If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with crete means for achieving enlightenment in this

deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain lifetime, makes this shift possible. Buddhahood in this lifetime” (WND-1, 4). When the Soka Gakkai’s first president,

Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, formulated his theory of

value, he did not include the aspects of “holiness”

A Teaching of Genuine Humanism

or “sacredness,” which many thinkers before him

Next, I’ll touch on the significance of Nichiren had considered to constitute religious value. For

Daishonin’s teaching of attaining Buddhahood in Mr. Makiguchi, “great good” was deemed the high-

this lifetime from three perspectives. est value a religion should strive to realize. By “great

I’ll start by pointing out that through opening good,” he is referring to the highest value that can

the way for all people to attain Buddhahood in be actualized by human beings and society. In

this lifetime through chanting Nam-myoho- Mr. Makiguchi’s theory of value, we find the view

renge-kyo, Nichiren established for the first time that a true religion is one that serves the welfare of

a teaching of genuine humanism. Opening the human beings. Nichiren’s opening of the path to

way to enlightenment for all people could be attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime signifies

called the prerequisite for a genuinely humanistic the establishment of a religion that contributes

religion. This, I believe, is the religious or philo- to the happiness of human beings in the greatest

sophical significance of the principle of attaining possible way. Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Nichiren had deep insight into the potential

The Significance of Attaining

of human beings, discerning that they could free Buddhahood for Our Lives themselves from a cycle of negative transmigra-

tion and realize a positive one through profound Second, by opening the path to attaining Buddha-

inner change. And he set forth a practical way to hood in this lifetime, Nichiren Daishonin made it

enable all people to achieve this. Consequently, possible for us to lead lives based on the infinite

there is no other teaching that can more power of the Mystic Law—that is, to lead solid

deservedly be called humanistic than Nichiren and secure lives that give us the courage and con-

Buddhism. fidence to be self-reliant. This is the significance

In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this

Nichiren writes: “Though it is thought that lifetime in terms of our individual lives. Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the three virtues In Nichiren Buddhism, attaining enlightenment

of sovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake is not about embarking on some inconceivably long

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

journey to become a resplendent, godlike Buddha; Only by winning over our inner darkness it is about accomplishing a transformation in the and negativity can we be victorious in life and depths of one’s being. This revolutionary view reveal our full potential. The same is true if we of enlightenment fundamentally changed the wish to savor true fulfillment. Allow me to meaning of Buddhist practice from how it was emphasize, then, that the Nichiren Buddhist traditionally viewed. practice toward attaining Buddhahood in this

In other words, it is not a matter of practicing in lifetime is the only means to conquer the dark-order to scale the highest summit of enlightenment ness and delusion that are the fundamental at some point in the distant future. Rather, it is source of human evil, and cultivate true inde-a constant, moment-to-moment, inner struggle pendence. It allows us to construct a solid self, between revealing our innate Dharma nature or and achieve a state of life of boundless happi-allowing ourselves to be ruled by our fundamental ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood darkness and delusion. This unceasing effort to pol- in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental

ish our lives is the essence of Buddhist practice. purpose of an individual’s life.

The Significance of Attaining Buddhahood for Humanity

The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it

explains that the entity of our life, which manifests either good or evil at each

moment, is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law.

If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle, you are

certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states,

“After I have passed into extinction, [one] should accept and uphold this sutra.

Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way.” Never

doubt in the slightest. (WND-1, 4)

Third, the principle of attaining Buddhahood realm has been neglected and all too many people in this lifetime is significant in that it offers are obsessed with seeking comfort, ease and pleasure a source of hope to humanity and opens the in external things—things outside of themselves. way to transforming the destiny of all humankind. Without surmounting the fundamental human This is its collective or universal significance. delusions of greed, anger and foolishness, we can-

Many leading thinkers and intellectuals recog- not solve the many problems that the world faces nize that modern civilization has lost sight of the today, including the preoccupation with economic human being and become deadlocked on many growth, politics that are devoid of humanism, fronts. There is no denying that the inner spiritual international conflicts, warfare, growing disparity

between rich and poor, and rampant discrimina- us that we should have complete confidence in

tion. One conclusion from my dialogues with the revealing of our Buddhahood in this lifetime.

leading thinkers is that the only real solution is for His words also contain the warning that unless we

human beings themselves to change, that the sole maintain this strong confidence, or faith, we can

key lies in human revolution. easily lose sight of the fundamental goal of attain-

It could further be said that without establish- ing Buddhahood in this lifetime and fall into the

ing a correct view of life and death, it is depths of darkness and delusion. impossible to conquer inner darkness and delu- All people at the core of their lives yearn to

sion at the most fundamental level. Without the attain enlightenment. But there is no teaching

Middle Way view of life and death—a view that more difficult to believe or understand than the

rejects the extremes of the doctrine of annihila- teaching that we can definitely manifest the state

tion and the doctrine of eternity7—true and of Buddhahood in our present existence. We of

lasting happiness cannot be achieved. the SGI have taken on the challenge of practicing

The only way for human beings to change is this profound teaching and sharing it widely with

for them to conquer their inner darkness and others around the globe. rediscover the eternal dignity within their own In today’s world, we, the courageous Bodhi-

lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all sattvas of the Earth, are showing great actual

people are originally endowed will directly lead to proof of humankind’s potential to transform

a change in the destiny of humankind. With that its destiny. Proud of our noble mission, let us

conviction, we of the SGI have been working to continue to joyously spread Nichiren Buddhism—

build a network of good all around the globe. with its teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this

In the course of these lectures, I will comment lifetime that enables all people to achieve unsur-

further on the growing expectations and praise for passed happiness—and lead the most valuable

this unprecedented endeavor we are undertaking. and fulfilling lives possible.

At the end of “On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime,” Nichiren Daishonin writes: “Never

doubt in the slightest” (WND-1, 4). He is telling

1. Toki Jonin: A lay follower of Nichiren Daishonin. He lived in Wakamiya, dragon form and preaches the Lotus Sutra to all living beings there (see

Katsushika District of Shimosa Province (part of present-day Chiba Prefec- The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, pp. 226 –28).

ture) and served as a retainer to Lord Chiba. He was the recipient of many 4. In ancient Indian cosmology, an extremely long period of time.

of Nichiren’s writings, including “The Object of Devotion for Observing 5. In his writing “The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms in a Single

the Mind,” and carefully preserved them. Moment of Life,” Nichiren states: “If votaries of the Lotus Sutra carry out

2. In “How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood religious practice as the sutra directs, then every one of them without

through the Lotus Sutra,” Nichiren writes: “When we revere Myoho-renge- exception will surely attain Buddhahood within his or her present lifetime.

kyo inherent in our own life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature To cite an analogy, if one plants the fields in spring and summer, then,

within us is summoned forth and manifested by our chanting of Nam- whether it be early or late, one is certain to reap a harvest within the year.

myoho-renge-kyo. This is what is meant by ‘Buddha.’ To illustrate, when a Votaries of the Lotus Sutra fall into three categories, superior, middling,

caged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby summoned inferior, depending upon their capacities, and yet all will invariably attain

and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gather around, the enlightenment within a single lifetime” (WND-2, 88).

bird in the cage strives to get out. When with our mouths we chant the 6. For SGI President Ikeda’s detailed discussion of this passage, see the

Mystic Law, our Buddha nature, being summoned, will invariably emerge” December 2004 Living Buddhism, p. 25.

(WND-1, 887). 7. The doctrine of annihilation is the mistaken attachment to the notion that

3. In “Devadatta,” the twelfth chapter of the Lotus Sutra, the eight-year-old life begins with birth and ends with death. According to this view, there is

daughter of the dragon king Sagara conceives the desire for enlightenment only the present life, and death represents a complete cessation of existence

when she hears Bodhisattva Manjushri preach the Lotus Sutra. She comes both physical and spiritual. The doctrine of eternity is also the mistaken

to offers a jewel to Shakyamuni and instantaneously perfects the bodhi- notion that what exists here in the present is permanent and unchanging.

sattva practice. She then appears in a land to the south called Spotless This view rejects causality, so that neither practicing good nor practicing

World and manifests the state of Buddhahood without changing her evil produces any change in one’s condition.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Key Points A Humanistic,

People-centered Religion

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Nichiren had deep insight into the potential of

human beings, discerning that they could free them-

in Terms of Faith and Practice

selves from a cycle of negative transmigration and

In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam-myoho-

realize a positive one through profound inner

renge-kyo has two aspects: the chanting of Nam- change. And he set forth a practical way to enable all

myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and chanting in people to achieve this. Consequently, there is no

terms of practice. Chanting in terms of faith refers other teaching that can more deservedly be called

to the spiritual aspect of our practice. This essen- humanistic than Nichiren Buddhism. In “The True

tially consists of the struggle we wage in our hearts Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren writes:

against our inner delusion or darkness—a battle “Though it is thought that Shakyamuni Buddha

against the negative and destructive forces within possesses the three virtues of sovereign, teacher, and

us. It means that through the power of faith—in parent for the sake of all of us living beings, that is

other words, through strengthening our conviction not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who

that we possess the Buddha nature—we can break endow him with the three virtues” (WND-1, 384).

through the darkness obscuring this awareness, This passage describes a shift from an authoritarian

thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood. Chant- to a humanistic, people-centered religion. The

ing in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers to teaching of Nichiren, who established the concrete

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves and means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime,

also teaching it to others. It means making efforts in makes this shift possible. (p. 7) word and deed for our own and others’ happiness

in the course of our spiritual struggle against inner The Fundamental Purpose of Our Lives

negativity and illusion. (p. 3) Only by winning over our inner darkness and neg-

ativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our

The Heart Is Most Important full potential. The same is true if we wish to savor

true fulfillment. Allow me to emphasize, then, that

The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted and rich;

the Nichiren Buddhist practice toward attaining

it has the capacity for magnificent achievement. For

Buddhahood in this lifetime is the only means to

that very reason, the heart often undergoes great

conquer the darkness and delusion that are the

suffering and torment, and can become trapped in

fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate

an endless, downward spiral. Will we transmigrate

true independence. It allows us to construct a solid

forever along the paths of evil, or can we succeed in

self, and achieve a state of life of boundless happi-

directing our lives into an orbit of good? As evi-

ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood in

denced in many of his writings, Nichiren repeatedly this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental pur-

stresses the crucial importance of the heart, or pose of an individual’s life. (p. 8) mind. In this inner realm of life, the potential resides

for dramatic shifts from evil to good or from good Changing the Destiny of All Humanity

to evil. That is why Nichiren’s teaching of enlighten-

The only way for human beings to change is for

ment can be viewed as a process that begins with

them to conquer their inner darkness and redis-

inner change. In other words, through the power of

cover the eternal dignity within their own lives.

faith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us

Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people

that are governed by the fundamental darkness in all

are originally endowed will directly lead to a change

human hearts and manifest the positive functions

in the destiny of humankind. With that conviction,

of life that are one with the Dharma nature—our

we of the SGI have been working to build a network

Buddhahood. (p. 5)

of good all around the globe. (p. 9)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime