Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

With a “Brave and Vigorous” Spirit—

Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge

The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas’ emancipation

in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities

of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It

also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands,

pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of

our minds.

It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is

called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This

is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A

mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar-

nished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror,

reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the

true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day

and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Those whose hearts shine with a commit- finds that ordinary beings are the entities of ment to truth and justice never lose enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth hope, even amid the greatest hardship or and death are nirvana” 2 (WND-1, 4). difficulty. Rather, they serve as a bright beacon “Ordinary beings are the entities of enlight-

illuminating the darkness of people’s suffering, enment” means that the wisdom for attaining imparting inspiration, assurance and courage. Buddhahood (enlightenment) manifests in the

When we change, the world changes. The lives of ordinary people steeped in earthly

key to all change is in our inner transforma- desires. Similarly, “the sufferings of birth and tion—a change in our hearts and minds. This is death are nirvana” means that the Buddha life-human revolution. We all have the power to state of true peace and tranquillity (nirvana)

change. When we realize this truth of life, we manifests in the lives of ordinary people tor-can bring forth that power anywhere, anytime mented by the sufferings of birth and death. and in any situation. Here, Nichiren explains that Buddhas and

Nichiren Buddhism, based on the transfor- ordinary people are not separated by an insur-mative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has made mountable divide; that the only thing setting this great path of inner change available to them apart is the difference in the “minds of

all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho- ordinary beings.” renge-kyo as its core practice. Nichiren also cites the passage from the

This time, I’ll discuss the passage in which Vimalakirti Sutra that explains the difference

Nichiren Daishonin outlines the basic attitude between pure and impure lands. This passage— and approach to our fundamental practice of which Nichiren summarizes as “If the minds of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. living beings are impure, their land is also

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their

land”3—clarifies that there are not two separate

Changing Ourselves lands; the only difference between pure and

and Changing the Land impure lands is “the good or evil of our minds.”

The view shown here is one in which the pure

As I have already touched on at length, the land does not exist in some otherworldly realm

entirety of Buddhism exists within our own but in the real world, and is achieved by people lives. And the key to attaining Buddhahood—the changing themselves inside. This is a dynamic ultimate transformation of our life-state—also and practical view of the pure land, based on

lies in a change in our hearts, or minds. the idea of “to purify Buddha lands” expounded

To convey this point, Nichiren Daishonin in the Lotus Sutra (The Lotus Sutra and Its here summarizes a point from the Vimalakirti Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 117).

Sutra: 1 “When one seeks the Buddhas’ emanci- The Vimalakirti Sutra passage cited by Nichi-pation in the minds of ordinary beings, one ren is from the “Inquiring about the Illness,”

or fifth, chapter. This chapter describes the Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual

exchange between Vimalakirti, an outstanding level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can

Buddhist lay believer and practitioner of the overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the

bodhisattva way who has fallen ill, and Manju- root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood

shri, one of Shakyamuni’s leading disciples, who with which we are originally endowed.

is visiting him. When asked the cause of his Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe

illness, Vimalakirti replies, “Because all living this fundamental potential for change, saying,

beings are sick, therefore I am sick.”4 This is a “This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will

well-known passage that succinctly reveals the shine like a jewel when polished” (WND-1, 4).

fundamental bodhisattva spirit of taking on In this way, he conveys that the practice of

others’ sufferings as one’s own. chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the means

Vimalakirti goes on to say that bodhisattvas for defeating our inner darkness—serves to

choose to be born among living beings afflicted “polish” our lives. by delusion and to share in the sufferings of All living beings are inherently entities of the

birth and death in order to instruct and guide Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud-

those living beings to enlightenment. More- dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of

over, bodhisattvas are never overwhelmed or the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin-

swayed by suffering, because they have estab- drance, whenever and in whatever form it is

lished a pure state of enlightenment within.5 needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life

Thus, the passages from the Vimalakirti to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even

Sutra cited by Nichiren clarify the meaning of though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we

Buddhahood and the pure land from the stand- cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our

point of a bodhisattva practitioner fighting lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a

amid the realities of daily life. Nichiren, there- benighted state, we are like a “tarnished mirror”

fore, states in conclusion, “When deluded, one that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-

is called an ordinary being, but when enlight- myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing

ened, one is called a Buddha” (WND-1, 4). In the tarnished mirror of our lives.

other words, the difference between ordinary

people and Buddhas is nothing more than the

difference between delusion and enlightenment The Path for Polishing Our Lives: in ordinary people’s minds. How, then, can we (1) Brave Challenge

transform delusion into enlightenment?

In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chant-

that when people’s hearts change, the land or ing as a practice for polishing our lives: “A mind

their external environment can also change. At now clouded by the illusions of the innate dark-

its foundation is a transformation from delu- ness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when

sion to enlightenment. polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror,

As discussed earlier, what makes this trans- reflecting the essential nature of phenomena

formation possible is the practice of chanting [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the true aspect of

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

SGI President Ikeda

welcomes U.N.

Under-Secretary-General

ress Anwarul K. Chowdhury at

P

o the Makiguchi Memorial Hall

Seiky in Tokyo, August 30, 2006.

reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to polish

your mirror day and night. How should you our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of

polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge- ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our

kyo” (WND-1, 4). enlightened Dharma nature.

The mirror simile here is truly ingenious. This practice of polishing our lives may be

The mirror being endowed with the property seen as having two aspects. One is to “arouse

of reflection corresponds to our lives being deep faith,” as Nichiren exhorts (WND-1, 4).

endowed with the mystic truth. But if a mirror is This could also be articulated as summoning

not polished, it will naturally become clouded. the fighting spirit to battle our inner darkness.

Since mirrors in Nichiren’s day were typically The other aspect is to continue making stead-

made of bronze, they would readily tarnish. A fast efforts, in accord with Nichiren’s

tarnished mirror could not fulfill its original admonition that we should “diligently polish

function, so it had to be polished regularly. our mirror day and night” (see WND-1, 4).

Similarly, if our lives are neglected and left These two points echo the two aspects of

uncultivated, they will be shrouded in ignorance. chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo identified

The act of polishing is indispensable for by Nichikan, a seventeenth-century restorer of

restoring the mirror’s innate property. More- Nichiren Buddhism, based on the phrase in

over, just polishing a mirror once is not the “Expedient Means” chapter of the Lotus

enough. We have to keep polishing it if we wish Sutra, “exert oneself bravely and vigorously”

it to retain its reflective property. As this (see LSOC, 56; Jpn yumyo shojin). Nichikan metaphor aptly attests, our practice of chanting explains that “bravely and vigorously” (yumyo)

means courageously bringing forth the power Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a crucial requirement

of faith, or confidence, in chanting Nam-myoho- for attaining Buddhahood.

renge-kyo, while “exert oneself ” (shojin) means Nichiren writes: “Suffer what there is to suf-

engaging sincerely and consistently in the fer, enjoy what there is to enjoy. Regard both

practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.6 suffering and joy as facts of life, and continue

In chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, no matter

first important thing is having the challeng- what happens. How could this be anything other

ing spirit to act with courage. This could be than the boundless joy of the Law?” (“Happiness

described as arousing deep faith from the in This World,” WND-1, 681). We must continue

innermost reaches of our lives in accord with chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo during times

Nichiren’s words, firmly believing that we can of both suffering and joy. The emphasis here is

summon forth the mystic truth within us, on the word continue, and it is key that we do so manifest our inherent Buddhahood and throughout “both suffering and joy.” When con-

attain enlightenment in this lifetime without fronted with suffering, we must not retreat. We

fail. It also means directly taking on the three should “suffer what there is to suffer.” This is nei-

obstacles and four devils that seek to obstruct ther resignation nor escapism. We need to fix

us from chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. We our gaze unflinchingly on reality and bravely

need to have a fearless, tireless and unremit- challenge it based on chanting Nam-myoho-

ting challenging spirit to confront and renge-kyo. Nichiren is explaining that this is the

overcome the diverse array of obstacles that correct attitude for practitioners of the Mystic

rise up to assail us. For it is precisely by chal- Law. Faith in Nichiren Buddhism is constantly

lenging, battling and defeating ignorance that directed toward transforming reality. we can polish our lives. Of course, such a state of life is not gained

overnight. But if we steadfastly and diligently

continue making efforts to polish ourselves day

The Path for Polishing Our Lives: in and day out, month after month, year after

(2) Continuing year, we will naturally and surely come to attain

it, mirroring the words of the sutra passage

Next, continuing is vital. It is absolutely essential “This cluster of unsurpassed jewels / has come

for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. to us unsought” (LSOC, 124).7 Nichiren Daishonin says: “To accept is easy; to Next, “enjoy what there is to enjoy” (WND-1,

continue is difficult. But Buddhahood lies in 681), can be taken to mean that when we’re expe-

continuing faith” (“The Difficulty of Sustaining riencing joy, we should remember to have

Faith,” WND-1, 471). In “On Attaining Buddha- gratitude and make even greater efforts to chant

hood in This Lifetime,” we see the paramount Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, aiming toward the ulti-

importance of continuing from Nichiren’s mate goal of attaining Buddhahood in this

repeated emphasis on the need to practice “day lifetime. Deepening our seeking spirit in faith is

and night” and “diligently” (WND-1, 4). Main- much more difficult in good times than in bad,

taining an unflagging practice of chanting because in good times it is easy to grow lax and

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

self-satisfied. Rather than being someone who is an unshakable state of life that is one with the

strong in adversity but weak when things are Dharma nature (namely, the life-state of Bud-

going well, we should seek to construct the kind dhahood). This is because if we “slacken in our

of invincible faith that allows us to “regard both resolve even a bit” (see WND-1, 997), as Nichi-

suffering and joy as facts of life” (WND-1, 681). ren writes, we will become vulnerable to life’s

Such strong faith is forged through our prac- negative influences. tice as Soka Gakkai members striving to achieve Also, when we exert ourselves in faith, the

the lofty goal of kosen-rufu and our own enlight- three obstacles and four devils inevitably arise.

enment in this existence. Above all, chanting It is by defeating them that we can establish the

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the process by which life-state of Buddhahood. When we polish our

we “diligently polish our mirror day and night” lives on the most fundamental level through

(see WND-1, 4)—strengthens our lives in the the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

same way that a magnificent sword is forged and kyo, we can deepen, strengthen and broaden

tempered. The crux here lies in chanting with the ourselves spiritually without limit.

spirit to challenge in times of suffering, and

chanting with appreciation in times of joy.

“Continuing” is another way of saying “not “Nam-myoho-renge-kyo regressing.” Throughout the pages of Nichiren’s Is a Diligent Practice”

writings, we can see his emphasis on never

regressing or backsliding in faith. To cite but a Nichiren Daishonin strove to share the supreme

few passages, Nichiren writes: “One . . . who inner state of attaining Buddhahood in this

chants the daimoku, is the Thus Come One’s lifetime with all his followers—and indeed all

emissary. Also, one who perseveres through humankind.

great persecutions and embraces the sutra from The true greatness of the practice of chant-

beginning to end is the Thus Come One’s emis- ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it enables

sary” (“The Farther the Source, the Longer the each person to actually manifest the same

Stream,” WND-1, 942); “Strengthen your faith life-state as the Buddha and lead an existence

day by day and month after month. Should you of unsurpassed depth and meaning. This is

slacken in your resolve even a bit, devils will clearly indicated in the following well-known

take advantage” (“On Persecution Befalling the passage from The Record of the Orally Transmit-Sage,” WND-1, 997); and “Carry through with ted Teachings : “If in a single moment of life we your faith in the Lotus Sutra. You cannot strike exhaust the pains and trials of millions of

fire from flint if you stop halfway” (“Earthly kalpas, then instant after instant there will arise

Desires Are Enlightenment,” WND-1, 319). in us the three Buddha bodies8 with which we

Without a battle to conquer ignorance or are eternally endowed. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

darkness, we cannot manifest the essential is just such a ‘diligent’ practice” (p. 214). nature of phenomena, or Dharma nature. And Ever since our second Soka Gakkai presi-

unless we continue to wage this battle through dent, Josei Toda, explained this passage to me

exerting ourselves in faith, we cannot construct in my youth, I have made it the personal

motto by which I have lived my life. In all my Praying for Brave and struggles, I have borne these words ever in mind. Vigorous Youth To Appear

The “Emerging from the Earth” chapter

of the Lotus Sutra describes countless Exerting oneself means doing so bravely and bodhisattvas appearing from out of the vigorously. Without courage and vigor, there is

ground—the emergence of the Bodhisattvas of no true exertion. The first Soka Gakkai presi-

the Earth. It explains that they have been dent, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, also led a life of

dwelling in the empty space underneath the brave and vigorous endeavor. He once said to

saha world and seeking the Buddha way with young people: “Exert yourselves bravely and

constant diligence (see LSOC, 259). The above vigorously! Buddhism means taking action; it

quote from The Record of the Orally Transmit- means constantly striving. Even at my age,

ted Teachings clarifies from the standpoint of that’s what I’m doing.” Nichiren Buddhism the nature of their dili- President Toda also remarked to youth,

gence or tireless exertion. “Youth who wish for the happiness of humanity

The essence of Nichiren Buddhism is that should first themselves seek the essence of this

those who exert themselves assiduously to seek lofty philosophy of human revolution. They

the Buddha way automatically manifest the should exert themselves bravely and vigorously

life-state of the Buddha eternally endowed with to fight and triumph over all manifestations of

the three bodies—in other words, they bring the three powerful enemies and the three

forth their inherent Buddhahood. obstacles and four devils.”

When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as if My sentiments are exactly the same. I chant

to concentrate in a single moment the arduous Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ardently for brave and

exertions of incalculable eons—“exhausting the vigorous disciples, brave and vigorous youth, to

pains and trials of millions of kalpas” (see OTT, appear throughout the world. I am wholeheart-

214)—then the life-state of the Buddha eternal- edly chanting for this every day. Exerting oneself

ly endowed with the three bodies (namely, our bravely and vigorously is truly the hallmark of

Buddhahood) appears within us instant after the Soka Gakkai’s mentor-disciple spirit.

instant. The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice. renge-kyo is the driving force for progress,

Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing the driving force for victory. Every challenge

to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires should begin with chanting Nam-myoho-

constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering renge-kyo. No one is a match for those who

single-mindedly and consistently in this practice steadfastly chant. will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this Diligently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent morning and evening, let us thoroughly polish

Buddhahood—the Buddha eternally endowed ourselves inside and construct lives in which we

with the three bodies—wells forth in the form win victory after victory. of inexhaustible courage, perseverance, joy,

wisdom and compassion.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

1. Vimalakirti Sutra: A Mahayana sutra about Vimalakirti, a wealthy and enters the realm of birth and death, and because he is in the realm of

prominent citizen of the city of Vaishali at the time of Shakyamuni. In birth and death he suffers illness. If living beings can gain release from

the sutra, Vimalakirti represents the ideal Mahayana lay believer. The illness, then the bodhisattva will no longer be ill.” The Vimalakirti

Sanskrit original of this sutra is not extant, but there are three Chinese Sutra, p. 65.

translations, including one by Kumarajiva, which is the most popular 5. The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 65ff.

version and the work usually referred to when this title is mentioned.

6. In “Interpreting the Text Based upon Its Essential Meaning,” a treatise of

2. Here, Nichiren Daishonin summarizes passages from the Vimalakirti

The Six-Volume Writings,Nichikan writes: “You should understand that

Sutra and the Great Teacher T’ien-t’ai’s reference to it. “Inquiring

‘to exert oneself bravely and vigorously’ (see LSOC, 56; Jpn yumyo sho-

About the Illness,” the fifth chapter of the sutra, contains the following

jin) refers to faith and to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It therefore

exchange: “‘And how is the emancipation of the Buddhas to be sought?’

means the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo of the essential teaching.

asked Manjushri. ‘It may be sought in the minds . . . of all living

‘Bravely and vigorously’ (yumyo) refers to faith. A commentary [on the

beings,’ replied Vimalakirti.” The Vimalakirti Sutra, trans. by Burton

Lotus Sutra] therefore states: ‘Yu (bravely) means to act with courage;

Watson from the Chinese version by Kumarajiva (New York: Columbia

myo (vigorously) means to expend all one’s wisdom.’ Hence, ‘bravely

University Press, 1997), p. 66.

and vigorously’ describes courageously bringing forth the power of faith

In his Great Concentration and Insight, T’ien-t’ai writes: “According

to the Vimalakirti Sutra, the emancipation of the Thus Come One to the fullest extent. Shojin (to exert oneself) indicates the practice of

should be sought in the minds of living beings. Because living beings chanting daimoku. A commentary therefore states: ‘Sho (pure) means

are entities of enlightenment, it is not something to be obtained. unadulterated; jin (effort) means ceaseless advance.’”

Because [the birth and death of] living beings are nirvana, [birth and 7. These words are an exclamation of joy when Shakyamuni’s voice-

death] are not extinguished. Emancipation already exists in the heart hearer disciples learn that they can in fact attain Buddhahood, which

of one and the hearts of all, as do all phenomena.” had previously been denied to them.

3. This summary is based on the passage, “When the mind is pure, the 8. The three bodies of the Buddha refer to the Dharma body, the reward

Buddha land will be pure.” The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 29. body and the manifested body. The Dharma body is the fundamental

4. Vimalakirti says: “Because all living beings are sick, therefore I am sick. truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is

If all living beings are relieved of sickness, then my sickness will be the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the com-

mended. Why? Because the bodhisattva for the sake of living beings passionate actions the Buddha carries out to lead people to happiness.

SGI President Ikeda’s

Lecture Series

The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life

A series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on Nichiren Daishonin’s writing “The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life.” Nichiren states: “Shakyamuni

Buddha who attained enlightenment countless kalpas ago, the Lotus Sutra that leads all people to Buddhahood, and we ordinary human beings are in no way diff erent or separate from one another. To chant Myoho-renge-kyo with this realization is to inherit the ultimate Law of life and death.”

SKU #290991 • $5.95

Learning From the Writings:

The Hope-fi lled Teachings of Nichiren Daishonin

A series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on 15 writings from Nichiren

Daishonin, including “Winter Always Turns to Spring,” “The Dragon Gate,” “The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra” and “Lessening One’s Karmic Retribution.” President Ikeda states in the introduction to this lecture series: “The writings of Nichiren Daishonin fully elucidate this philosophy of hope as well as its practice and

proof. They are a source of illumination that endlessly encourages and inspires . . . Let us strive to read with our lives—that is, to put into practice—even a line or two of Nichiren’s writings, which overfl ow with his spirit.”

SKU #290992 • $8.95

Available at your local SGI-USA bookstore or from:

(800) 626-1313 or bookstore.sgi-usa.org 

Key Points

When We Change, the World Changes Arousing Deep Faith

When we change, the world changes. The key to and Making Continual Efforts all change is in our inner transformation—a The act of polishing is indispensable for restoring

change in our hearts and minds. This is human the mirror’s innate property. Moreover, just polish-

revolution. We all have the power to change. ing a mirror once is not enough. We have to keep

When we realize this truth of life, we can bring polishing it if we wish it to retain its reflective prop-

forth that power anywhere, anytime and in any erty. As this metaphor aptly attests, our practice of

situation. Nichiren Buddhism, based on the chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to

transformative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has polish our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of

made this great path of inner change available to ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our

all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho- enlightened Dharma nature. This practice of pol-

renge-kyo as its core practice. (p. 38) ishing our lives may be seen as having two aspects.

One is to “arouse deep faith,” as Nichiren exhorts

Changing the Environment (WND-1, 4). This could also be articulated as sum-

Through Changing People’s Hearts moning the fighting spirit to battle our inner

darkness. The other aspect is to continue making

Nichiren explains that when people’s hearts steadfast efforts, in accord with Nichiren’s admoni-

change, the land or their external environment tion that we should “diligently polish our mirror

can also change. At its foundation is a transforma- day and night” (see WND-1, 4). (p. 40) tion from delusion to enlightenment. What makes

this transformation possible is the practice of

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiri-

tual level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can Is a Diligent Practice overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice.

root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing

with which we are originally endowed. (p. 39) to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires

constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering

Polishing Our Lives Through single-mindedly and consistently in this practice

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Through such efforts, our inherent Buddha-

All living beings are inherently entities of the hood—the Buddha eternally endowed with the

Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud- three bodies—wells forth in the form of inex-

dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of haustible courage, perseverance, joy, wisdom and

the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin- compassion. (p. 43) drance, whenever and in whatever form it is

needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life

to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even

though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we

cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our

lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a

benighted state, we are like a “tarnished mirror”

that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the

tarnished mirror of our lives. (p. 39)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime