The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—



Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through Correct Buddhist Practice



The practice of chanting Nam-myoho- truth innate in all life” (The Writings of Nichiren renge-kyo contains immeasurable benefit, Daishonin , vol. 1, p. 3). for it enables us to summon forth in our This passage encapsulates the profound prin-own lives the limitless power of the Mystic Law, ciples of Buddhism and the religious revolution the fundamental law of the universe. to bring about the enlightenment of all people

Nichiren Daishonin actualized happiness for that was begun by Shakyamuni Buddha and com-all humankind through the boundless beneficial pleted by Nichiren. Each word and phrase is power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The doctrinal infused with the sublime wisdom of Buddhism. basis for this endeavor is set forth with great sim- “To free oneself from the sufferings of birth plicity and conciseness in the opening passage of and death endured since time without beginning”

“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime”: “If relates to the fundamental questions of human you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of existence and the original purpose of religion. “To birth and death you have endured since time attain unsurpassed enlightenment” constitutes without beginning and to attain without fail the profound Buddhist response to these ques-unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you tions. “To perceive the mystic truth inherent in all must perceive the mystic truth that is originally living beings” is this response further refined and inherent in all living beings. This truth is deepened based on the philosophy of the Lotus Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo Sutra. And “chanting Myoho-renge-kyo” refers to will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic the practice established by Nichiren to enable all



11

OAB_pp.11-19_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:40 PM Page 12



On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood



people to translate this Buddhist wisdom into than two millennia, and the compassion and action. The realization of this practice is the fruit wisdom for leading all people to enlightenment

of great compassion that aspires for the happiness found in Nichiren Buddhism. of all people, and indicates the truly revolutionary The purpose of this installment is to confirm

nature of Nichiren Buddhism. that Nichiren’s practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

Through this passage as a whole, it becomes renge-kyo represents the ultimate form of correct

clear that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho- Buddhist practice, and that its establishment renge-kyo established by Nichiren is the correct marks the start of a genuinely people-centered

and supreme Buddhist practice. Indeed, the short Buddhism that makes it possible for all opening passage succinctly articulates the pro- humankind to achieve the same enlightened state found insights of Buddhism distilled over more as the Buddha.





Attaining a State of Eternal Happiness



If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have

endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed

enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is orig-

inally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting

Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in

all life. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3)



Let us start by considering the profound Nichiren Daishonin’s reference to “the suffer-meaning of the opening phrase, “If you ings of birth and death endured since time wish to free yourself from the sufferings of without beginning” is premised on the concept of birth and death you have endured since time transmigration, according to which living beings without beginning . . . ” undergo an unceasing, suffering-filled cycle of



12

OAB_pp.11-19_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:40 PM Page 13





birth and death that continues from the infinite The Mystic Truth Embraces past into the infinite future. Buddhism holds that and Is Inherent in All Things this never-ending round of suffering ultimately

arises from earthly desires, and that a negative In this passage, to “perceive the mystic truth that is cycle of earthly desires, karma and suffering is originally inherent in all living beings” means to part and parcel of transmigration. In this sense, “attain unsurpassed enlightenment.” The wisdom “the sufferings of birth and death endured since to apprehend this universally inherent truth repre-time without beginning” also represents an inter- sents the supreme enlightenment of the Buddha. minable succession of illusion and suffering. The point where Buddhism radically departs

Because the thought of such endless transmi- from many other philosophies and religions is gration is ultimately unbearable, people naturally that it uncovered within the individual’s own life came to wish for a way to put an end to this the Law, or limitless inner power, for resolving all painful cycle and free themselves from the chains suffering on the most essential level. A Buddha is of delusion and suffering. one who, based on this Law, has attained the ulti-

In Buddhism, there are two basic approaches to mate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to liberation from the suffering of this cycle. One suffering and construct indestructible happiness. view holds that people can free themselves from Buddhism is a teaching of unparalleled the endless karmic cycle of birth and death by humanism that stresses the boundless potential eradicating earthly desires believed to cause it. The within human beings. That’s why it is called the other is the Mahayana approach, in which the “internal way.” essence of life that undergoes transmigration is not To “perceive the mystic truth that is originally viewed as a transient, impermanent phenomenon. inherent in all living beings” is to “attain unsur-

The Mahayana teachings, for example, espouse passed enlightenment”; it is the sole means for the concept of undergoing the cycle of birth and freeing oneself from “the sufferings of birth and death in accordance with the bodhisattva vow to death endured since time without beginning.” guide living beings to enlightenment; or they view This is Shakyamuni’s starting point, and the the oscillation between birth and death as a cycle entirety of Buddhist thought. The scripture that of emerging from and returning to the funda- proclaims this philosophy of the “internal way” is mental, all-embracing life of the universe. The the Lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people can latter view can be easily understood using the attain enlightenment. The Lotus Sutra could be metaphor of waves on the ocean: birth is like a said to embody the ultimate principle of respect wave appearing on the surface of the ocean—the for human dignity. life of the universe—while death is the wave sub- In this writing, Nichiren Daishonin says that merging back into that ocean. Gaining such an the “mystic truth that is originally inherent in all understanding of the essence of our own lives, living beings” is the “principle of the mutually which repeat the cycle of birth and death, is to inclusive relationship of a single moment of life attain “unsurpassed enlightenment,” the highest and all phenomena.” This latter principle refers to awakening of the Buddha. the inscrutable relationship that exists between



13

OAB_pp.11-19_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:40 PM Page 14



On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood



ourselves—our minds or each life-moment—and could give it the most appropriate name (see

the universe; its meaning is that all phenomena WND-1, 421).2 Naming something is a creative are contained in one’s life and that one’s life process. Giving a name that accurately grasps the

pervades all phenomena. This principle no essence of a thing has the important effect of doubt corresponds in meaning to the “principle making that essence available to all people; it

of inherence and pervasion”1 articulated by enables all people to share in its value. Nichikan, an early eighteenth-century restorer In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life-

of Nichiren Buddhism, in describing the doc- time,” as indicated by the passage “the mystic

trine of “three thousand realms in a single truth that is originally inherent in all living beings

moment of life.” is Myoho-renge-kyo,” Nichiren states that this

The cosmic life enfolds and pervades every- mystic truth that constitutes the fundamental

thing, and because it does so, it is also inherent in Law of the universe is none other than Myoho-

all things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our renge-kyo. Strictly speaking, the term Myoho-individual lives lies at the heart of the “principle renge-kyo existed prior to this as the title of the of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single Lotus Sutra, but Nichiren was the first to identify

moment of life and all phenomena.” To awaken to Myoho-renge-kyo as being the name of the prin-

this mystic truth is to attain the Buddha’s “unsur- ciple of the “true aspect of all phenomena,”3

passed enlightenment.” which the Lotus Sutra teaches is the profound

wisdom of all Buddhas. Also, although the “Life

Span” chapter of the Lotus Sutra expounds the

Naming the Mystic Truth life of the eternal Buddha from the standpoint of

Shakyamuni, it was Nichiren who first revealed

The question is how to enable all people to per- that the essence of the Buddha’s eternal life—the

ceive this “mystic truth that is originally “heart of the ‘Life Span’ chapter”—is Myoho-

inherent in all living beings.” A widely accessible renge-kyo (see “The Object of Devotion for

Buddhism will not be possible if only a very Observing the Mind,” WND-1, 371). limited number of people can follow the way set The eternal Buddha, since attaining enlighten-

forth for apprehending the mystic truth. Before ment in the remote past, repeatedly undergoes the

Nichiren Daishonin, the Great Teacher T’ien- cycle of birth and death as a Buddha while appear-

t’ai of China tried to establish the means for ing in various forms within the Ten Worlds4 for the perceiving this mystic truth through the prac- salvation of all living beings. The “Life Span” chap-

tice of observing the mind, also known as the ter reveals that living beings of the Ten Worlds

practice of concentration and insight. But it was (including Buddhas), and the phenomena of birth

not a means readily accessible to the people of and death as well, are all manifestations of the great

the Latter Day of the Law. eternal life of the universe. Because Nichiren says

The initial step Nichiren took in opening the that the “heart of the ‘Life Span’ chapter” is Myoho-

great path to universal enlightenment was to renge-kyo, we can infer that Myoho-renge-kyo is

name the mystic truth. The universally inherent the name of the great, eternal, universal life that is

mystic truth originally had no name, but as revealed in the “Life Span” chapter. Nichiren explains in “The Entity of the Mystic Living beings in the nine worlds, repeatedly

Law,” a sage awakened to this truth in his own life undergoing birth and death, also follow the



14

OAB_pp.11-19_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:40 PM Page 15



rhythm of birth and death of emerging from and Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the “mystic truth submerging back into the great eternal life that that is originally inherent in all living beings.” is Myoho-renge-kyo. They are embraced by It was Nichiren who first declared that Myoho-renge-kyo, and at the same time possess Myoho-renge-kyo is to be chanted and spread in Myoho-renge-kyo within them. This is why the Latter Day of the Law.





Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo To Perceive the Mystic Truth

and Establish the Buddhism of the People



The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, true and correct in both word and prin-

ciple. Its words are the ultimate reality, and this reality is the Mystic Law

(myoho). It is called the Mystic Law because it reveals the principle of the

mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena.

That is why this sutra is the wisdom of all Buddhas.

Life at each moment encompasses the body and mind and the self and

environment of all sentient beings in the Ten Worlds as well as all insentient

beings in the three thousand realms, including plants, sky, earth, and even

the minutest particles of dust. Life at each moment permeates the entire realm

of phenomena and is revealed in all phenomena. To be awakened to this

principle is itself the mutually inclusive relationship of life at each moment

and all phenomena. (WND-1, 3)



Nichiren Daishonin’s next step in opening established the practice of invoking this truth. this great path was to establish the prac-Nam means “to dedicate one’s life.” Chanting tice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo aloud represents a deter-He appended the word nam—a transliteration of mination and vow to dedicate one’s life to the the Sanskrit word namas, meaning “devotion”— realm of truth of Myoho-renge-kyo in thought, to the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo, and word and deed.



15

OAB_pp.11-19_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:40 PM Page 16



On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood



At the same time, chanting Nam-myoho- process of establishing a self capable of activating

renge-kyo enables each person to actualize a way and tapping from within the “mystic truth origi-

of life based on the universal truth of Myoho- nally inherent in all living beings.” renge-kyo. The crucial point in chanting Nam- Looking back on the history of Buddhism,

myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism is not even though the Lotus Sutra has taught the

simply intoning the name of an external truth. It awakening to this mystic truth, over time people

constitutes a practice to actually summon forth lost sight of its existence within their own lives.

the inner truth that pervades the universe and our It was in that context that T’ien-t’ai established

own selves and live our lives in accord with that the meditative practice for observing the mind

truth. This practice could be described as a based on the principles of “three thousand





BUDDHISM IN A NEW LIGHT



Eighteen Essays That

Illuminate Our Buddhist Practice

by shin yatomi



This compilation of insightful essays by Shin Yatomi

explores topics such as the meaning of freedom and

the difference between arrogance and confidence,

each essay clarifying the meaning of faith and

practice for Nichiren Buddhists. By applying the

humanistic teachings that are reiterated in this small

book, you will learn of the unconditional value of all

life, and what love is and what it is not. You will be

encouraged to develop an authentic Buddhist sense

of peace and justice.



Paperback • 179 pages • 5"x7" Available at your local SGI-USA

Price $3.95 • SKU #4150 bookstore or from:

(800) 626-1313 • bookstore.sgi-usa.org



16

OAB_pp.11-19_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:40 PM Page 17





realms in a single moment of life” and the “mutu- that highest state of life. The wisdom and com-ally inclusive relationship of a single moment of passion of a Buddha that emerges through life and all phenomena.” He thereby sought to chanting enriches our life-condition, and brings enable people to summon forth the world of happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as Buddhahood. T’ien-t’ai’s meditation of observ- more and more people come to chant Nam-ing the mind could be viewed as an appropriate myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves practice that restored the correct path of the and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance Lotus Sutra. of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha

Further, in order to enable all people to and to ultimately transform even the destiny of perceive and actualize the “mystic truth originally humankind. inherent in all living beings,” Nichiren gave it the

name Myoho-renge-kyo and established the prac-

tice of invoking that name—the practice of Salute to the Rise of the chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. By doing so, he Buddhism of the Sun opened the way for all people to dedicate their

lives to and live based on the mystic truth. Another point we should bear in mind regarding

Thus Nichiren established the means by the true meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is which all people can awaken to the truth of life that it is also the name of the life of the Buddha and the universe within their own lives and of the Latter Day, Nichiren Daishonin. Nam-actively manifest that truth. Moreover, this truth myoho-renge-kyo and the life of the original is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is Buddha are indivisibly connected. We could say revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest that the fundamental truth of Myoho-renge-kyo teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on that pervades life and the universe was only iden-that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value. tified and established for the first time through Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth Nichiren himself practicing it and manifesting it accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no mat- in his behavior. He gave concrete expression to ter what his or her background. It would be no the Law that people had not been able to perceive exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting up to that point. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism Nichiren’s life as the Buddha of the Latter Day gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This prac- is a life dedicated to battling evil and vanquishing tice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist ignorance. The struggle to free people from all practice, making it possible for us to fundamen- misfortune and misery in the world—from all tally transform our lives. negative karma and the sufferings of birth, aging,

In other words, to chant Nam-myoho-renge- sickness and death—ultimately entails battling kyo is to summon forth our own innate the fundamental darkness or ignorance that gives Buddhahood.5 It is the direct path to manifesting rise to all evil and suffering.



17

OAB_pp.11-19_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:40 PM Page 18



On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood



As Nichiren indicates when he says that the chants Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, one’s life imme-

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the hap- diately becomes the object of devotion of three

piness of self and others toward the realization thousand realms in a single life-moment. It

of kosen-rufu clears “the clouds of ignorance” becomes the life of Nichiren Daishonin.”6 The

(see “The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms,” practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is

WND-2, 85), Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly has the supreme path to attaining Buddhahood

the power to dispel life’s darkness. When we through which each person can become a shining

chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the sun of Bud- sun in his or her own right. dhahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and The great nineteenth-century Russian poet

delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the sun, Aleksandr Pushkin sings: “Before the bright

are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood dawn, even so / Shall flicker and die every

comes to shine within us, the darkness of sophistry jaded / At reason’s unperishing spark. / ignorance vanishes. Salute to the sunrise, and vanish the dark!”7

But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching in Nichiren Buddhism is the Buddhism of the

which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a sun that opens the path of life’s supreme victory

teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of

for all humankind. With “Salute to the sunrise!”

Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We

as our rallying cry, let us dynamically advance in

are truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same

the struggle to dispel the darkness of ignorance in

brilliant life-state of Buddhahood as Nichiren.

people’s hearts.

In this regard, Nichikan writes: “When one

embraces and has faith in this Gohonzon and



1. Commenting on T’ien-t’ai’s words, “The three thousand realms exist in life endowed with the potential to become Buddhas, and can tap and manifest

at each moment,” Nichikan writes in his Six-Volume Writings: “The intent this potential.

of [the Lotus Sutra] is to reveal the principle of ‘inherence and pervasion.’ 4. The Ten Worlds are ten distinct realms or categories of beings referred to in

According to this principle, all phenomena inhere in a single moment of Buddhist scriptures. From the lowest to the highest, the realms of (1) hell,

life, and a single moment of life pervades all phenomena.” (2) hungry spirits, (3) animals, (4) asuras, (5) human beings, (6) heavenly

2. Nichiren Daishonin writes: “This passage of commentary means that the beings, (7) voice-hearers, (8) cause-awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and

supreme principle [that is the Mystic Law] was originally without a name. (10) Buddhas. From the standpoint of the Lotus Sutra, the Ten Worlds indi-

When the sage was observing the principle and assigning names to all cates ten potential states or conditions that a person can manifest or

things, he perceived that there is this wonderful single Law [myoho] that experience. Also includes the concept of the nine worlds, which indicates all

simultaneously possesses both cause and effect [renge], and he named it the worlds other than Buddhas.

Myoho-renge. This single Law that is Myoho-renge encompasses within it 5. Nichiren writes: “Therefore, when once we chant Myoho-renge-kyo, with

all the phenomena comprising the Ten Worlds and the three thousand just that single sound we summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of

realms, and is lacking in none of them. Anyone who practices this Law will all Buddhas; all existences; all bodhisattvas; all voice-hearers; all the deities

obtain both the cause and the effect of Buddhahood simultaneously” (“The such as Brahma, Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and the myriad

Entity of the Mystic Law,” WND-1, 421). stars; the heavenly gods and earthly deities, on down to hell-dwellers,

3. True aspect of all phenomena: The ultimate truth or reality that permeates hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human and heavenly beings, and all other

all phenomena and is in no way separate from them. A principle expressed living beings. This blessing is immeasurable and boundless” (“How Those

in “Expedient Means,” the second chapter of the Lotus Sutra. In the writ- Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus

ing titled “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren defined “all Sutra,” WND-1, 887).

phenomena” as all living beings and their environments in the Ten Worlds, 6. Commentary on the “The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” in

and “the true aspect” as the Law of Myoho-renge-kyo, the ultimate reality Nichikan Shonin mondanshu (The Commentaries of Nichikan Shonin)

permeating all living beings and their environments in any of the Ten (Tokyo: Seikyo Shimbunsha, 1980), p. 548.

Worlds. All phenomena, he stated, are manifestations of this universal Law; 7. Aleksandr Pushkin, Pushkin Threefold: Narrative, Lyric, Polemic, and Ribald

phenomena and the ultimate truth are inseparable and non-dual. The Verse, translated by Walter Arndt (New York: E. P. Dutton and Co., Inc.,

“Expedient Means” chapter clarifies the truth that all people are inherently 1972), p. 20.



18

OAB_pp.11-19_LB_Sept-Oct 11/22/11 2:40 PM Page 19



Key Points wisdom of all Buddhas and is revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism.

By basing ourselves on that truth, we can lead lives

Uncovering People’s Inner Potential

of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this

The point where Buddhism radically departs from

realm of truth accessible to anyone, anywhere, any-

many other philosophies and religions is that it

time, no matter what his or her background. It

uncovered within the individual’s own life the Law,

would be no exaggeration to say that the practice

or limitless inner power, for resolving all suffering

of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren

on the most essential level. A Buddha is one who,

Buddhism gave rise to a Buddhism of the people.

based on this Law, has attained the ultimate wis-

This practice of chanting is indeed the supreme

dom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and

Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fun-

construct indestructible happiness. Buddhism is a

damentally transform our lives. (p. 17)

teaching of unparalleled humanism that stresses

the boundless potential within human beings. The Direct Path to That’s why it is called the “internal way.” (p. 13)

Manifesting Buddhahood

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to summon

The Mystic Truth of Life

forth our own innate Buddhahood. It is the direct

and the Universe path to manifesting that highest state of life. The

The cosmic life enfolds and pervades everything, wisdom and compassion of a Buddha that emerges

and because it does so, it is also inherent in all through chanting enriches our life-condition, and

things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our indi- brings happiness to ourselves and others. Further,

vidual lives lies at the heart of the “principle of the as more and more people come to chant Nam-

mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves

of life and all phenomena.” To awaken to this mys- and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance

tic truth is to attain the Buddha’s “unsurpassed of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha

enlightenment.” (p. 14) and to ultimately transform even the destiny of

humankind. (p. 17)

The Meaning of Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Causing the Sun of

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables each per- Buddhahood To Rise Within son to actualize a way of life based on the universal As Nichiren indicates when he says that the Nam-

truth of Myoho-renge-kyo. The crucial point in myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the happiness of self

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu

Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an clears “the clouds of ignorance” (see “The Doctrine

external truth. It constitutes a practice to actually of the Three Thousand Realms,” WND-2, 85), Nam-

summon forth the inner truth that pervades the myoho-renge-kyo truly has the power to dispel life’s

universe and our own selves and live our lives in darkness. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

accord with that truth. This practice could be the sun of Buddhahood rises in our hearts. The igno-

described as a process of establishing a self capable rance and delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the

of activating and tapping from within the “mystic sun, are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood

truth originally inherent in all living beings.” (p. 16) comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance

vanishes. But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching

Establishing a Buddhism of the People in which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a

Nichiren established the means by which all people teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of

can awaken to the truth of life and the universe Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We are

within their own lives and actively manifest that truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same bril-

truth. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened liant life-state of Buddhahood as Nichiren. (p. 18)



19





OAB_pp.20-27_LB_November-December 11/22/11 2:42 PM Page 20





On Attaining



In This Lifetime