======================================================================
ON ATTAINING BUDDHAHOOD IN THIS LIFETIME
Lectures by SGI President Daisaku Ikeda
======================================================================

COMPREHENSIVE VALIDATED TEXT
Generated: 2025-11-29 12:29

Sources used (in order of priority):
  1. FINAL_VERIFIED - Audio transcript-based (Chapters 1-4)
  2. Surya OCR - Layout-optimized OCR output
  3. TRUE_VERSION - Gemini extraction
  4. Tesseract OCR - Fallback reference

This text reads as if reading the actual book.
======================================================================


--- Chapter 1 ---
This recording is to support the Sadi Review for SGI members. It is based on the lectures of Daisaku Ikeda about Nichiren Daishonin's letter, Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. The reader of this material is Jimmy Wallace. When you hear a bell, this is a quotation from the original Gosho, read by me, Lily Della Porta. Enjoy the lectures

Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, the fundamental purpose of life and a source of hope for humankind.

If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning, and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime. you must perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life.

Just what constitutes a deeply meaningful life? What is true happiness? Nichirend Daishonin's Buddhism is a teaching of hope that enables us to forge a state of unsurpassed and indestructible happiness and to lead a life of supreme value while also helping others do the same Everyone has the potential to attain Buddhahood. Moreover, they can gain that lofty state just as they are, and in fact are assured of being able to do so in this lifetime. The Buddhism of Nichiren Daishoning clearly elucidates this wonderful path to enlightenment. The Daishonin's profound teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime was a revolutionary concept. that turned prevailing Buddhist thought on its head. Indeed, it continues to shine today as a principle that can powerfully transform the age and open a bright future for our modern world in the twenty first century. Therefore, I look forward to studying the Daishonin's writing on attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, together with you. As we embark in high spirits on a new journey of growth and development. The profound meaning of chanting Daimoku. On attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is an important writing that clarifies the basic theory and practice of Nichiren Daishonin's Buddhism. SGI members throughout the globe have deepened their understanding of the essence of the Daishona's teachings by earnestly studying this writing as a guideline for practice and study. Although the original is no longer extant and the precise date and name of the recipient are unknown, this letter is traditionally held to have been written around 1255. and addressed to Toki Jonin. The assertion that it was composed in twelve fifty five, shortly after the Daishonin publicly declared his teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in twelve fifty three is credible in view of the letter's content, explaining as it does the significance of chanting Daimoku in terms of both theory and practice. The practice of chanting Daimoku is the foundation of the Daishonin's lifetime teachings. The Buddhism of Nichun Daishonin, unlike the established Buddhist schools of his day was not dedicated to the worship of a specific god or buddha. The Daishonin established the means for all people to achieve enlightenment. the ideal of the Lotus Sutra, by formulating the practice of chanting NaMyoho-renge-kyo, which enables us to activate our inherent Buddha nature and manifest it as the life state of Buddhahood. There are two aspects of the Daimoku in Nichirend Daishonin's Buddhism, the Daimoku of faith and the daimoku of practice. The daimoku of faith refers to the spiritual aspect of our practice. This essentially consists of the struggle we wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or darkness. A battle against the negative and destructive forces within us. It means breaking through the darkness, clouding our Buddha nature, and bringing forth the life state of Buddhahood through the power of faith. The Daimoku of practice, meanwhile, refers to chanting Nam-myohoringe Kyo ourselves and also teaching it to others. It means making efforts in word and deed for the happiness of ourselves and others as evidence of our spiritual struggle against inner negativity and illusion. When we chant Nam-myohoringa Kyol, we are both chanting the name of and calling forth the Buddha nature in our own lives and the lives of others. When our faith wins out over inner doubt and delusion, the power of our inherent Buddha nature is called forth by the sound of our daimoku and spontaneously manifests In our lives. The key point that set the Daishonin's Buddhism apart from the other Buddhist schools of his day was the establishment of this concrete means for attaining Buddhahood. and from the time he first declared Nam-myoho-renge-kyo until the moment of his death, the Daishonin ardently strove to teach the supreme path of enlightenment to people throughout the land. In the opening passage of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, the Daishonin clearly and fully articulates the basic philosophy of salvation that lies at the heart of his teaching. Which exists for the happiness of all humanity. If you wish to free yourself from the suffering of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life I would like to discuss the profound meaning of this passage in detail next time, but briefly, it says that by manifesting within us the mystic truth inherent in all living beings, we can free ourselves of the endless sufferings of birth and death. The name of that mystic truth is Myoho-renge-kyo, and the way to manifest it is through chanting Myoho-renge-kyo. The significance of our existence as human beings.

Nevertheless, even though you chant and believe in my horenge kyo, if you think the law is outside yourself You are embracing not the mystic law, but an inferior teaching.

The concept of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime refers to an ordinary person becoming enlightened during the course of their present existence. What this also means, by extension, is that they can achieve that just as they are. As such, attaining Buddhahood in this life means the same thing as attaining Buddhahood in one's present form. which is the approach to Buddhahood found in the Lotus Sutra and illustrated by the example of the Dragon King's daughter in the Sutras Devadatta, 12th chapter. This view contrasts sharply with the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, which expound that one can become enlightened only after practicing austerities over countless lifetimes. Because the lifestyle of Buddhahood is at one with the eternal mystic law and abounds with infinite wisdom and compassion. It tended to be seen as something completely separate and removed from the lives of ordinary people steeped in illusion. Attaining enlightenment was thought to require overcoming the unfathomably deep chasm between the spiritual states of a Buddha and ordinary people. And this gave rise to the idea that it was necessary to carry out austere practices for innumerable kalpas. Nichiren Daishonin's Buddhism clarifies that it is specifically in this present existence in which we have been born as human beings. that we can actualize the principle of attaining Buddhahood in one's present form that is revealed in the Lotus Sutra. This is what led him to elucidate his profound teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Drawing an analogy with rice crops, the Daishonin notes that while some ripen early and some ripen late, they will all mature and be ready for harvest within the year. He explains that practitioners of the Lotus Sutra will likewise attain Buddhahood in this existence without fail. The Daishon places importance on the present lifetime of human beings. Of course, not only humans, but all living beings possess the Buddha nature and have the potential to attain Buddhahood in their present form. But the reason that Daishonin stresses attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is that his focus is always first and foremost on the happiness of human beings. The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted and rich, and has capacity to achieve incredible feats. But for that very reason, it often also undergoes great suffering and torment. Likewise, the human heart can become trapped in an endless negative downward spiral. Will our lives transmigrate forever in the paths of evil, or can we succeed in moving them into an orbit of good? As evidenced in many of his writings, the Daishonin repeatedly stresses the crucial importance of the heart or mind It is this inner realm of life that the potential resides for dramatic shifts from evil to good, or from good to evil. That is why the Darshona's teaching of enlightenment can be viewed as a process that begins with inner change. In other words, Through the power of faith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us, workings that are governed by the fundamental darkness that resides in all human hearts And manifest the positive functions of life that are one with the Dharma nature, that is, our Buddhahood. This present lifetime in which we have been born as human beings. Represents a golden opportunity to ensure that our lives no longer transmigrate in the evil paths, but instead traverse through the paths of good. Emphasis on inner change.

Therefore, when you chant Myohol and recite Renge, you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. Arouse deep faith and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting NaMyoho-renge-kyo

In on attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, the Daishonin thoroughly explains that we cannot achieve enlightenment without a profound change in our lives themselves, that is, a change in our hearts and minds. First of all, he says that the mystic truth with which all living beings are endowed reveals the principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena. What this means is that our lives or our minds at each moment both embody all phenomena and pervade all phenomena. This could be described as a state of life of oneness with the universe. Also, the Daishonin warns that if we seek the mystic law outside ourselves then no matter how much daimoku we chant, we will not be able to attain enlightenment. On the contrary, our Buddha's practice will only become an endless painful austerity. He clearly states Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the mystic law but an inferior teaching. The Daishonin explains that summoning up deep faith is the key to chanting Daimoku, and declares that when we do so, we can polish our lives and attain enlightenment. He writes Therefore, when you chant myho and recite renge, i. e. , chant daimoku, you must summon up deep faith that myhorengeol is your life itself. literally your mind at each moment. And arouse deep faith and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. In addition, the Daishonin speaks of the mystic entity of the middle way that is the ultimate reality In other words, the mystic, inscrutable nature of life, of our hearts and minds that manifests as Buddhahood. In this way, he indicates that Myoho-renge-kyo is the mystic lore of life, or the inner realm of our beings. On that basis, he asserts that when we chant Daimoku with deep faith in the mystic law, we can attain Buddhahood in this lifetime The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life which manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the mystic law. If you chant Miohoringo with deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. A teaching of genuine humanism. Next, I wish to touch on three aspects in which the Daishonin's teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is significant. First, I would like to point out that by opening the way for all people to attain enlightenment in this lifetime through chanting Daimoku. the Daishonen established for the first time a teaching of genuine humanism. Opening the way to enlightenment for all people could be called the prerequisite for a genuinely humanistic religion. This, I believe, is the religious or philosophical significance of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nietrun Daysonen had deep insight into the potential of human beings, discerning that they could free themselves from a cycle of negative transmigration and realize a positive one through profound inner change. And he set forth a practical way to enable them to achieve this. Consequently, there is no other teaching that can be more deservedly called humanistic than the Daishonin's Buddhism. In the true aspect of all phenomena, the Daishonin writes, Though it is thought that Shakumuni Buddha possesses the three virtues of sovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake of all of us living beings, That is not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who endow him with the three virtues. This passage describes a shift from an authoritarian religion to a humanistic, people-centered religion. The Buddhism of Nichun Daishonin, who established the concrete means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime, makes this shift possible. When the Soka Gakkai's first president, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, formulated his theory of value, he did not include holiness or sacredness. which a number of other thinkers before him had considered to constitute a religious value. For mister Makiguchi, great good was deemed the highest value that a religion should strive to realize. Great good here refers to the highest value that can be actualised by human beings and society In Mr. Makiguchi's theory of value, we find the view that a true religion is one that serves the welfare of human beings. The opening of the path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime by the Daishonins signifies the establishment of a religion that contributes to the happiness of human beings in the greatest possible way. The significance of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime from the individual perspective Second, by opening the path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, the Daishonin made it possible for us to lead lives based on the infinite power of the mystic law. That is, to lead solid and secure lives that give us the courage and confidence to be self-reliant This is the significance of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime in terms of our individual lives. In the Daishonin's Buddhism, attaining enlightenment is not about embarking on some inconceivably long journey to become a resplendent god-like Buddha. It is about accomplishing a transformation in the depths of one's being. This revolutionary view of realizing enlightenment fundamentally changed the whole meaning of Buddhist practice as it was traditionally viewed. In other words, it is not a matter of practicing in order to scale the highest summit of enlightenment at some point in the distant future. Rather, it is a consistent moment-to-moment inner struggle between the opposing courses of revealing our innate Dharma nature. Or allowing ourselves to be ruled by our fundamental darkness and delusion. This unceasing effort to polish our lives is the heart and essence of Buddhist practice Only by winning over our inner darkness and negativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our full potential. The same is true if we wish to save a true fulfilment in our lives. In that sense, I want to emphasize that the practice set forth in Nechandaison's Buddhism in order to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime is the only means to conquer the darkness and delusion that are fundamental source of human evil. In that sense, I want to emphasize that the practice set forth in Nechrandaison's Buddhism in order to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime is the only means to conquer the darkness and delusion that are the fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate true independence. construct a solid self, and achieve a state of life of boundless happiness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental purpose of an individual's life. The significance of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime from the collective perspective.

The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras The direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life, which manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the mystic law If you chant Miyoharangeol with deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states, After I have passed into extinction, one should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way. Never doubt in the slightest

Third, I assert that the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is significant in that it offers a source of hope to humanity and opens a way to transforming the destiny of all humankind. This is its collective or universal significance. Many leading thinkers and intellectuals share a recognition that modern civilization has lost sight of the human being and become deadlocked. on many fronts. There is no denying that the inner spiritual realm has been neglected, and all too many people are obsessed with seeking comfort, ease, and pleasure in external things. things outside of themselves, without surmounting the fundamental human delusions of greed, anger, and foolishness We will not be able to solve the many problems that the world faces today, including the preoccupation with economic growth. politics that are devoid of humanism, international conflicts, warfare, growing disparity between rich and poor, and rampant discrimination One conclusion from my dialogues with leading thinkers is that the only real solution is for human beings themselves to change, that the sole key lies in human revolution. It could further be said that without establishing a correct view of life and death, it is impossible to conquer inner darkness and delusion at the most fundamental level. Without the view of life and death of the middle way, a view that rejects the extremes of the doctrine of annihilation and the doctrine of eternity, true and lasting happiness cannot be achieved. The only way for human beings to change is for them to conquer their inner darkness and rediscover the eternal sanctity and dignity within their own lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people are originally endowed will directly lead to a change in the destiny of humankind. With that conviction, we of the SGI have been working to build a network of good all around the globe. In the course of these lectures, I would like to comment further on the growing expectations and praise for this unprecedented endeavour we are undertaking. At the end of this writing, the Daishonin says, never doubt in the slightest. He is telling us that we should have complete confidence in our attainment of Buddhahood in this lifetime. His words also contain the warning that unless we maintain strong faith, we can easily lose sight of the fundamental goal of enlightenment and fall into the depths of darkness and delusion. All people, at the core of their lives, yearn to attain enlightenment. But there is no teaching more difficult to believe or understand than the teaching that we can definitely attain Buddhahood in our present existence. We of the SGI have taken on the challenge of practicing this profound teaching and sharing it widely throughout the globe. In today's world, we, the courageous Bodhisattvas of the earth, are showing great actual proof for humankind's potential to transform its destiny Proud of our noble mission, let us continue to joyously spread the Daishonin's Buddhism with its teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime that enables all people to achieve unsurpassed happiness. and lead the most valuable and fulfilling lives possible

--- Chapter 2 ---
This recording is to support the Sadi Review for SGI members. It is based on the lectures of Daisaku Ikeda about Nichiren Daishonin's letter, Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. The reader of this material is Jimmy Wallace. When you hear a bell, this is a quotation from the original Gosho, read by me, Lily Della Porta. Enjoy the lectures.

Chapter 2. The Significance of Chanting Daimoku, Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through Correct Buddhist Practice The practice of chanting the Daimoku of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo contains immeasurable benefit For it enables us to summon forth in our own lives the limitless power of the mystic law, the fundamental law of the universe. Nichiren Daishonin stood up to realize happiness for all humankind through the boundless beneficial power of Nammyohoring. The doctrinal basis for this endeavor is set forth with great simplicity and conciseness in the opening passage of On Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning, and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime. You must perceive the mystic law that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life.

This passage encapsulates the profound principles of Buddhism and the religious revolution to bring about the enlightenment of all people that was begun by Shakyamuni Buddha and completed by the Daishonin. Each word and phrase is infused with the sublime wisdom of Buddhism. To free oneself from the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning. relates to the fundamental questions of human existence and the original purpose of religion. To attain unsurpassed enlightenment constitutes the profound Buddhist response to these questions. To perceive the mystic truth inherent in all living beings is in this response further refined and deepened based on the teachings of the Lotus Sutra. Enchanting Myoho-renge-kyo refers to the practice established by the Daishonin to enable all people to translate this Buddhist wisdom into action. The realization of this practice is the fruit of great compassion that aspires for the happiness of all people, and indicates the truly revolutionary nature of Nichiren Buddhism. Through this writing as a whole, it becomes clear that the practice of chanting Daimoku established by the Daishonin is the correct and supreme Buddhist practice. Indeed, the short opening passage succinctly articulates the profound insights of Buddhism distilled over more than two millennia. and the compassion and wisdom for leading all people to enlightenment found in the Daishonins Buddhism. The purpose of this instalment is to confirm that the Daishonin's practice of chanting Daimoku represents the ultimate form of correct Buddhist practice. And that its establishment marks the start of a genuine Buddhism of the people that makes it possible for all humankind to achieve the same enlightened state as the Buddha. Freeing oneself from the sufferings of birth and death and attaining a state of eternal happiness

If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning, and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime. You must perceive the mystic law that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life.

Let us start by considering the profound meaning of the opening phrase. If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning. The Daishonin's reference to the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning is premised on the concept of transmigration. according to which living beings undergo an unceasing, suffering-filled cycle of birth and death that continues from the infinite past into the infinite future. Buddhism holds that this never-ending round of suffering ultimately arises from earthly desires, and that a negative cycle of earthly desires, karma, and suffering. is part and parcel of transmigration. In this sense, the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning also represent an interminable succession of illusion and suffering. Because the thought of such endless transmigration is ultimately unbearable, people naturally came to wish for a way to put an end to this painful cycle of birth and death And free themselves from the chains of illusion and suffering. In Buddhism, there are two basic approaches to liberation from the sufferings of this cycle. One view holds that people can free themselves by eradicating the earthly desires that lead to transmigration in the realm of karma. The other is the Mahayana approach, in which the essence of life that undergoes transmigration is not viewed as a transient and permanent phenomena. The Mahayana teachings, for example, espouse the concept of undergoing the cycle of birth and death in accordance with the Bodhisattva vow to guide living beings to enlightenment. or view birth and death itself as a cycle of emerging from and returning to the fundamental, all-embracing life of the universe. The latter view can be easily understood using the metaphor of waves on the ocean. Birth is like a wave appearing on the surface of the ocean, the life of the universe while death is the wave submerging back into that ocean. Gaining such an understanding of the essence of our own lives which repeat the cycle of birth and death is to attain unsurpassed enlightenment, the highest awakening of the Buddha. The mystic truth embraces and is inherent in all things. In this passage, to perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings means to. Attain unsurpassed enlightenment. The wisdom to apprehend this universally inherent truth represents the supreme enlightenment of the Buddha. The point where Buddhism radically departs from the thought and religion that had existed previously is that it uncovered within the individual's own life, the law. or limitless inner power for resolving all sufferings on the most essential level A Buddha is one who, based on this law, has attained the ultimate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and construct unshakable happiness. Buddhism is a teaching of unparalleled humanism that believes in the boundless potential within human beings. That's why it is called the Internal Way. To perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings is to attain unsurpassed enlightenment. and is the sole means for freeing oneself from the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning. This is Shakyamuni's starting point and the conclusion of Buddhist thought. The scripture that proclaims this philosophy of the internal way is the Lotus Sutra Which teaches that all people can attain enlightenment. The Lotus Sutra could be said to embody the ultimate principle of respect for the dignity and sanctity of the human being. In this writing, the Daishonin says that the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings is the principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena. This latter principle refers to the inscrutable relationship that exists between ourselves, our minds, or each life moment, and the universe. Its meaning is that all phenomena are contained in our life and that our life pervades all phenomena. This principle, no doubt, corresponds in meaning to the principle of inherence and pervasion articulated by Nichikan Shonen. In describing the doctrine of three thousand realms in a single moment of life, the cosmic life enfolds and pervades everything, and because it does so It is also inherent in all things. The oneness of life of the universe and our individual lives lies at the heart of the principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena. To awaken to this mystic truth is to attain the Buddha's unsurpassed enlightenment. Naming the Mystic Truth. The question is how to enable all people to perceive this mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. A widely accessible Buddhism will not be possible if only a very limited number of people can follow the way set forth for apprehending the mystic truth. Before the Daishonin, the great teacher T'ien-t'ai of China, tried to establish the means for perceiving this mystic truth through the practice of contemplation and meditation on the law. But it was not a means that was readily accessible for the people of the latter day of the law. The initial step that Daishonin took in opening the great path to universal enlightenment was to name the mystic truth. The universally inherent mystic truth originally had no name, but as the Dyson explains in The Entity of the Mystic Law, A sage awakened to this truth in his own life was able to give it the most appropriate name. Name me something is a creative process. Attaching a name that accurately grasps the essence of a thing has the important effect of making that essence available to all people. It enables all people to share in its value. In on attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, as indicated by the passage, The mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings is Myohoring Gekyo. The Daishoning clearly states that this mystic truth that constitutes the fundamental law of the universe. Is none other than Myohoringa Kyol. Strictly speaking, the term Muhoringa Kyol existed prior to this as the title of the Lotus Sutra. But the Daishonin was the first to identify Myoho-renge-kyo as being the name of the principle of the true aspect of all phenomena. Which the Lotus Sutra teaches is the profound wisdom of all Buddhas. Also, although the lifespan chapter of the Lotus Sutra Expound the life of the eternal Buddha from the standpoint of Shakyamuni, it was the Daishonin who first revealed that the essence of the Buddha's eternal life The heart of the lifeband chapter is Myohoringa Kyo. The eternal Buddha, since attaining enlightenment in the remote past, repeatedly undergoes the cycle of birth and death as a Buddha while appearing in various forms within the ten worlds for the salvation of all living beings. The lifespan chapter reveals that living beings of the ten worlds, including Buddhas, and both birth and death, are all manifestations of the great eternal life of the universe. Because the Daishon says that the heart of the lifespan chapter is Myoho-renge-kyo, we can infer that Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the great eternal universal life that is revealed in the lifespan chapter. Living beings in the nine worlds repeatedly undergoing birth and death also follow the rhythm of birth and death of emerging from and submerging back into the great eternal life that is Myohoringa Kyol. They are embraced by Miohoring and at the same time possess Miohoringa Kyol within them. This is why Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. It was the Daishon who first declared that Myoho-renge-kyo is the Daimoku to be chanted and spread in the latter day of the law. Initiating the practice of chanting Daimoku for perceiving the mystic truth, establishing the Buddhism of the people.

The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, true and correct in both word and principle. Its words are the ultimate reality, and this reality is the mystic lore, Myoho. It is called the Mystic Law because it reveals the principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena. That is why this sutra is the wisdom of all Buddhas. Life at each moment encompasses the body and mind and the self and environment of all sentient beings in the ten worlds, as well as the insenent beings in the three thousand realms. including plants, sky, earth, and even the minutest particles of dust. Life at each moment permeates the entire realm of phenomena and is revealed in all phenomena. To be awakened to this principle is itself the mutually inclusive relationship of life at each moment and all phenomena.

The Daishon's next step in opening this great path was to establish the practice of chanting Daimoku The Daishonin appended the word num, a phonetic change of Namu, to the universal truth of Myohor and Gekyor. And establish the practice of invoking this truth. Num means dedicating one's life to. Chanting Nam Myoho-renge-kyo aloud represents a determination and vow to dedicate one's life to the realm of truth of Myoho-renge-kyo in thought, word, and deed. At the same time, chanting Daimoku enables each person to actualize a way of life based on the universal truth of Myohoring Geikyo. The crucial point in chanting Daimoku in the Daishonas Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an external truth. Chanting Daimoku constitutes a practice to actually summon forth the inner truth that pervades the universe and our own selves and live our lives in accord with that truth. This practice could be described as a process of establishing a self capable of activating and tapping from within the mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings. Looking back on the history of Buddhism, even though the Lotus Sutra has always taught that one should open one's eyes to this mystic truth. Over time, people lost sight of the fact that it it exists within their own lives. It was in that context That T'ien-t'ai established a meditative practice based on the principles of 3,000 realms in a single moment of life, and the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena. He thereby sought to enable people to summon forth the world of Buddhahood. T'ien-t'ai's method of meditation, of observing the mind, could be viewed as an appropriate practice. That restored the correct path of the Lotus Sutra. Further, in order to enable all people to perceive and actualize the mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings. Nichiren Daishonen gave it the name Myoho-renge-kyo and established the practice of invoking that name, the practice of chanting Daimoku. By doing so, he opened the way for all people to dedicate their lives to and live based on the mystic truth. Thus the means by which all people could awaken to the fact that the truth of life and the universe exists within their own lives, and actively manifest that truth, was established by the Daishonin. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is fully revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value. The Daishonins Buddhism opened this realm of faith So that it was accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no matter what their background. It would be no exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting Daimoku in Nitrian Buddhism. is what gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This practice of chanting Daimoku is indeed the supreme Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fundamentally transform our lives. In other words, to chant Daimoku is also to summon forth our own innate Buddhahood. It is the direct path to manifesting that highest state of life. The wisdom and compassion of the Buddha that emerges through chanting Daimoku enriches our being and brings happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as more and more people come to chant Daimoku for the happiness of themselves and others, It will be possible to forge a dedicated alliance of people whose lives shine with the Buddha's compassion and to ultimately transform even the destiny of humankind. Salute to the rise of the Buddhism of the Sun. Another point we should bear in mind regarding the true meaning of Nam-myohoringa Kyol is that this is also the name of the life of the Buddha of the latter day Nichiren Daishonin. The name of Nam-myohoringtyo and the life of the original Buddha are indivisibly connected we could say that the fundamental truth of Myohoringkyo that pervades life and the universe was only identified and established for the first time through the Daishonin himself practicing it. And manifesting it in his behavior. He gave concrete expression to the law that people had not been able to perceive up to that point. Nitrun Daishonin's life as the Buddha of the latter day is none other than a life dedicated to battling evil and vanquishing ignorance. The struggle to free people from all misfortune and misery in the world, from all karma and the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness and death ultimately entails battling the fundamental darkness or ignorance that gives rise to evil and suffering. As the Daishonin indicates, when he says that the Daimoku of NamMyoho-renge-kyo, he chants for the happiness of self and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu. Clears the clouds of ignorance. Daimoku truly has the power to dispel darkness When we chant Nammyohorengaikyo, the sun of the world of Buddhahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and illusion that had shrouded the sun like heavy clouds are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance vanishes. And Nietraan Buddhism is not a teaching in which the Daishonin alone shines like the sun. It is a teaching in which each individual can bring the sun to rise in their lives, just as the Daishonin did. We are truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same brilliant life state of Buddhahood as Nichiren Daishonin. With respect to this, Nichikan Shonen writes, when one embraces and has faith in this Gohonzon and chants naMyoho-renge-kyo, One's life immediately becomes the object of devotion of three thousand realms in a single life moment. It becomes the life of Nichiren Daishonin. The practice of chanting Daimoku is truly the supreme path to attaining Buddhahood through which each person can become a shining sun in their own right. The Russian poet Alexander Pushkin sings: Before the bright dawn, even so, shall flicker and die every sophistry jaded At reason's unperishing spark, salute to the sunrise, and vanish the dark Nitrian Buddhism is the Buddhism of the sun that opens the path of supreme victory and life for all humankind. With salute to the sunrise as our rallying cry, let us dynamically advance in the struggle to dispel the darkness of ignorance in people's hearts.

--- Chapter 3 ---
This recording is to support the study review for SGI members. It is based on the lectures of Daisaku Ikeda about Nichiren Daishonin's letter, Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. The reader of this material is Jimmy Wallace. When you hear a bell, this is a quotation from the original Gosho, read by me, Lily Della Porta. Enjoy the lectures

Chapter 3. If you think the law is outside yourself, you are not embracing the mystic law. To chant Nammyohoringo is to commune with the mystic lore. It is a Buddhist practice for fusing our lives with the mystic lore. At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the inner darkness that prevents this fusion from taking place. When we vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance through faith, and become one with the mystic law, the infinite power of this great law unfolds in our lives. This is the immeasurable benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with a seeking spirit and faith. is the essence of the practice of chanting established and propagated by Nichiren Daishonin. It is the heart that is most important. The Daishonin asserts When it comes to chanting, therefore, we should above all strive to summon forth courageous faith to overcome illusion without being defeated by the three obstacles and four devils. Making the cause and effect of attaining Buddhahood the core and inmost essence of our lives. Myohoringa Kyo is the name of the ultimate mystic truth, and Nammyohoringa Kyo is the name of the life state of Buddhas who embody and reveal this truth. Thus, when we chant Nam Myoho-renge-kyo with a seeking spirit in faith, the infinite benefit of my horenge kyo unfolds in our lives. This is what it means to bring forth the world of Buddhahood. At work here is the principle of cause and effect in a single moment of life. in which faith is the cause and manifesting the life state of Buddhahood is the effect. When we continue chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo through times of both suffering and joy, while striving for the happiness of ourselves and others, we can make the cause and effect for attaining Buddhahood, which are themselves contained within the practice of chanting. The core and inmost essence of our lives. When we do so, the indomitable state of Buddhahood emerges within us This is the meaning of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. In his treatise, the object of devotion for observing the mind. The Daishonin states, Shakyamuni Buddha, who has attained perfect enlightenment, is our own flesh and blood. His practices and resulting virtues are our bones and marrow. He explains that to embrace Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself attaining enlightenment. The power of chanting Nam Myoho-renge-kyo enables us to actualise cause and effect in a single moment of life. that is, faith, cause, leading to the manifestation of our Buddhahood, effect. Considered in this light, our voice chanting Daimaku is the voice of unshakable faith and seeking spirit. that demolishes the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion and sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is also the courageous lion's roar that issues forth from the Buddhahood we have revealed as a result of our daimakun. The chanting of Nammyohoringo is not only the voice of faith of ordinary people, it is also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we should always try to chant resonant daimoku with a vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a galloping horse. It can also be said that chanting Daimoku is an action by which we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities of Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to return to our true original selves and tap the innate life force that we have possessed from time without beginning. The Daishonin declares, there is no true happiness for human beings other than chanting Nam-myohoring. This happiness, he says, is the boundless joy of the law. Joy of the law describes the unshakable happiness and peace of mind that is inherent in life and existence itself. To experience this joy means to fully savour and enjoy the infinite life force that is one with the mystic lore. The Da Shonen states that the only way for us to taste the joy of the mystic law is through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The Mystic Law and Incomplete Teachings.

Even though you chant and believe in my horenge kyo, if you think the law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the mystic law, but an inferior teaching. Inferior teaching means those Buddhist teachings other than this sutra, which are all expedient and provisional. No expedient or provisional teaching leads directly to enlightenment And without the direct path to enlightenment, you cannot attain Buddhahood, even if you practice lifetime after lifetime for countless kalpas. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is then impossible. Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite Renge, you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself.

Given Daimoku's profound meaning, we must always remember when we chant that Myoho-renge-kyo is our life itself. If we lose sight of this point, then no matter how much daimoku we may chant, we will have departed from the practice of chanting taught by Nichiren Daishonin. Therefore, in on attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, the Dashonan says in stern warning. Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the mystic law, but an inferior teaching. Inferior here means incomplete. The mystic law is the ultimate truth that is perfect and complete. In contrast, an incomplete teaching sets forth only a partial truth. The above passage contains a profound philosophy that overcomes one of the serious pitfalls that religion tends to succumb to. It also embodies a crucial philosophy of faith for attaining genuine happiness. Religion is generally Held to be a universal endeavor to connect the human being to the infinite, absolute, and divine. While this is in a sense true, It seems that many religions from the outset postulate a separation between the secular and the divine, and between human beings and gods or buddhas, and thus seek to bridge that gap. The Daishonin, however, regard teachings of this kind that view the absolute or divine as a separate from human beings. as incomplete, citing as an example the provisional pre-Lotus Sutra teaching expounded by Shakyamuni. These teachings do not set forth the principles or practice that enable ordinary people to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Rather, they espouse that one must first undergo innumerable kalpas of austere practice before enlightenment can be gained. In the provisional pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, a virtually insurmountable gulf exists between Buddhas and ordinary people. Only a very small handful of exceptional practitioners who, after having undergone austerities for countless kalpas, can even attempt to reach the goal of enlightenment. Moreover, according to these teachings, it is inconceivable for someone who has become a Buddha to go back to being an ordinary person. As a rule, the world where Buddhas dwell is not this strife-filled Sahara world where ordinary people reside. Buddhas and ordinary people are completely separate. Therefore, as long as such a divide exists between the world of Buddhahood and the nine worlds, that is, the realm of ordinary beings. There is really no way for all people to attain enlightenment. In this worldview, ordinary people and the idealized Buddhas are poles apart. thus leaving ordinary people with no option but to aspire for salvation through the assistance or intervention of such Buddhas This perceived separation between the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood is demolished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of three thousand realms in a single moment of life. In other words, the teaching that the nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds. Here we can see the immense importance of the Lotus Sutra's principle of the mutual possession of the Ten Worlds. The Daishonin opened the way to actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the practice of chanting of NamMyoho-renge-kyo. This constitutes, in its fullest, the most complete form, the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlightenment for all human beings. Summoning forth and manifesting the Buddha nature. The mystic law is the fundamental law of the universe In that sense, it has a universality that transcends our individual selves. However, as indicated by its description, as the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings, The mystic law also exists within our lives. It both resides within us and transcends us Put another way, the mystic law is also inherent in our lives because it is the all-embracing law that pervades everything in the universe. In his writing, How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus Sutra, the Daishonin explains the essence of Myohoringa Kyol as follows. As for the meaning of Myohoringa Kyo, the Buddha nature inherent in us ordinary people the Buddha nature of Brahma, Chakra and the other deities, the Buddha nature of Shariputra, Magdalayana and the other voice hearers. The Buddha nature of Mandushri, Maitreya and the other Bodhisattvas, and the mystic law that is the enlightenment of the Buddhas of the three existences are one and identical This principle is called Myoho-renge-kyo. Not only is Myoho-renge-kyo our own Buddha nature, he says, But it is also the Buddha nature of all heavenly deities, voice hearers, Bodhisattvas, and so on. Moreover This Buddha nature is identical to the mystic law to which the Buddhas of the Three Existences are enlightened. The Daishonin then goes on to explain that chanting Daimoku is a practice in which we summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature inherent in the lives of all beings of the ten worlds. Therefore, when once we chant Myhoring, with just that single sound we summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of all Buddhas, all existences, all Bodhisattvas. All voice hearers, all the deities such as Brahma, Chakra, and King Yama, the sun and moon, and the Myrid stars, the heavenly gods and earthly deities on down to hell dwellers, hungry spirits, animals, assurers, human and heavenly beings, and all other living beings. This blessing is immeasurable and boundless. And he further states regarding the meaning of chanting Daimoku, when we revere Myoho-renge-kyo, inherent in our own life, as the object of devotion. The Buddha nature within us is summoned forth and manifested by our chanting of Nam-myohoringa Kyol. This is what is meant by Buddha. The expression is summoned forth and manifested points to the profound significance of the mystic lore. The Daishonin uses a wonderful metaphor to explain this principle of calling forth and revealing the inner Buddha nature. When a caged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby summoned and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in the cage strives to get out. The singing of the caged bird refers to the daimoku chanted by ordinary people who, shackled in the chains of fundamental darkness and earthly desires. arouse faith in the mystic law. In other words, it is Daimoku, chanted with faith, that is determined to win over all obstacles and become happy without fail through the power of the Mystic Law. The power of such strong, determined Daimoku calls forth the Buddha nature in all living beings. Not only does the Buddha nature of Brahma and Chakra and of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas throughout the universe manifest, but those chanting Nammyahoringa Kyol. Not only does the Buddha nature of Brahma and Chakra and of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas throughout the universe manifest But those chanting NaMyoho-renge-kyo are also able to sever the chains of fundamental darkness and delusion and reveal their own Buddha nature. In other words, it is the power of our voices, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, that connects our lives with the mystic law pervading all phenomena of the three thousand realms. In his writing, Letter to Nikkei, the Daishonin further explains the significance of chanting Daimoku through the famous analogy of a mother bird and an egg. He says that the chanting of Nam-myohoringa Kyo is like the warmth of the mother bird. At first, there is nothing inside the egg but liquid. But as a result of being warmed by the mother bird, the beak, eyes, and feathers are formed. Eventually the baby bird breaks through the shell and hatches, and is soon flying into the sky like its mother. In this analogy, the substance within the egg represents the Buddha nature of living beings, while the mother bird represents the Buddha who leads others to enlightenment The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is at once the voice of faith of ordinary people and a function of the life state of Buddhahood. The most important admonition that the Daishonin makes with regard to attaining enlightenment through chanting NamMyoho-renge-kyo is that we must not view the law as something outside ourselves. If we think the law exists externally, then we are reverting to the kind of divide between Buddhas and ordinary people found in the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings. Perceiving that one's own life is NamMyoho-renge-kyo. The daimoku of Nam Myoho-renge-kyo has immeasurable beneficial power Josei Toda, the second Soka Gakkai president, described the infinite power of the mystic law as follows. It is like lines sprawled on your back in a wide open space looking up at the sky. All that you wish for immediately appears. No matter how much you may give away, there is always more. It is never exhausted. Try and see if you can attain this state of life Indeed, nuMyoho-renge-kyo can be likened to a wish-granting jewel. How can we develop the boundless state of life that enables us to bring forth the necessary strength? when it's needed. President Toda often used to say, If you really want to achieve such a state of life, you have to fight with every ounce of your being for the Lotus Sutra, for kosen-rufu. It is the spirit to strive forever together with the Buddhas of the Three Existences and with Brahma and Chakra, wherever one might find oneself in the universe. to actualize a world of happiness and peace dedicated to value creation by helping people overcome misery and misfortune and the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness and death. Such was the vast and untrammelled spirit of my mentor. Throughout everything, mister Today continued To seek the law that exists nowhere but within our own lives. And he stressed the importance of living true to oneself. His starting point was his profound realization in prison that the Buddha is life itself and his awakening to his identity as a Bodhisattva of the earth. He also often spoke of the spirit of faith we need in order to perceive the mystic law within us, saying, You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is your own life. Or Propagating the mystic law in the latter day means firmly believing that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This is the spirit that the Daishonin teaches when he says, When you chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo Kyo is your life itself. a universal religion for the happiness of all humankind. Generally speaking, religions expound some infinite and eternal entity that transcends both human beings. and the impermanence of this world, using such terminology as God or law, This infinite and eternal entity may variously be regarded by different religions as a source of fear and awe, an object of adoration, a great void of emptiness or a wellspring of all embracing love. The Darshonin saw the power of the mystic law that encompasses and sustains all things in the universe as existing within human beings. and he established a means for actually manifesting that law in their lives. During my second lecture at Harvard University in September nineteen ninety three, I proposed three areas where Mahayana Buddhism could contribute to modern civilization. 1. In fostering the creation of peace. two. In paving the way toward the restoration and rejuvenation of humanity. three and in providing a philosophical basis for the symbiotic coexistence of all things. In connection with the second point, I stressed the important significance of the approach of Nichun Daishonin's Buddhism. which teaches neither a one sided reliance on the individual's own power, nor on external power. This perspective has resonated deeply with many scholars. According to the view of the Daishonin's Buddhism, it is only by praying to and fusing with the external power of the eternal, unchanging truth, transcending our limited finite selves, that we can wholly activate our own power. At the same time, however, this external, all encompassing, external power actually exists inherently in our lives. Thad Shonin writes, people are certainly self-empowered, and yet they are not self-empowered People are certainly other empowered, and yet they are not other empowered. What this means, I believe. is that by relying neither exclusively on external power nor on the power of the self, we can manifest the transcendent power that exists within us. It is chanting Nam-myohoringa Kyo that enables us to do this. In this way, the Daishonins Buddhism opens up a broad new vision of a universal religion for the happiness of all humankind, one that transcends the approach of teachings that strictly divide external power and the individual's own power.

and they emphasize one over the other. Excellement.

--- Chapter 4 (Part 1) ---
This recording is to support the study review for SGI members. It is based on the lectures of Daisaku Ikeda about Nichiren Daishonin's letter Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime The reader of this material is Jimmy Wallace. When you hear a bell, this is a quotation from the original Gosho, read by me, Lily Della Porta. Enjoy the lectures.

Chapter 4. Transforming our fundamental attitude, refusing to live a life that is an endless painful austerity. Lecture Battling Ignorance The character myo of myho or mystic lore has three meanings to be fully endowed, to open and to revive. These three meanings of myo are all implicit in chanting Daimoku. In other words, chanting Daimoku contains one, the myo of perfect endowment, meaning that the single law of Myoho-renge-kyo encompasses all phenomena. 2. The mole of transformation that opens the world of Buddhahood and the lives of beings in the nine worlds, the world from hell through Bodhisattva. And three. The mule of great benefit, whereby a life filled with suffering, is revived into a life of great tranquility and joy. Our life itself is an entity of the mystic law. Therefore, it is fully endowed with all phenomena. fundamental darkness and the enlightened Dharma nature, earthly desires and enlightenment, and the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood, all of these exist within us. For precisely that reason, we can carry out a mystic and fundamental inner revolution, changing darkness into light. Kindling the flame of enlightenment by burning the firewood of earthly desires, and thereby manifesting the world of Buddhahood in our life of the nine worlds. The key to achieving this profound inner transformation is our heart, our fundamental attitude or mindset Therefore, the Daishonin warns in on attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. If you think the law is outside yourself You are embracing not the mystic law but an inferior teaching. When we diligently exert ourselves in chanting Daimoku Based on this admonition, always remembering that a change in our own heart or mind is crucial, the three meanings of myo will clearly manifest themselves in our life. Needless to say, the law contained in the practice of chanting that the Dyson and spread is truly wondrous. However, even the power of this wondrous law cannot fully manifest in a life that is clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that prevents us from believing in the mystic law and staying focused on the Buddha nature of ourselves and others. The practice of chanting enables us to break through this darkness and vibrantly bring forth our Buddhahood. Battling our ignorance, this inner struggle, is the essence of chanting Daimoku. Studying Buddhism, yet succumbing to non-Buddhist thinking.

You must never think that any of the 8,000 sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha's lifetime or any of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of the Ten Directions and Three Existences are outside yourself. Your practice of the Buddhist teachings will not relieve you of the sufferings of birth and death in the least unless you perceive the true nature of your life. If you seek enlightenment outside yourself, then your performing even 10,000 practices and 10,000 good deeds will be in vain. It is like the case of a poor man who spends night and day counting his neighbour's wealth, but gains not even half a coin. That is why the T'ien-t'ai school's commentary states Unless one perceives the nature of one's life, one cannot eradicate one's grave offences. This passage implies that unless one perceives the nature of one's life, one's practice will become an endless, painful austerity. Therefore, such students of Buddhism are condemned as non-Buddhist. T'ien-t'ai's great concentration and insight states that although they study Buddhism, their views are no different from those of non-Buddhists. Whether you chant the Buddha's name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of goodness in your life. With this conviction, you should strive in faith.

In the passage that we are studying this time, the Daishonin further strongly cautions, you must never think that any of the 80,000 sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha's lifetime. Or any of the Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of the Ten Directions and Three Existences are outside yourself. The use of the word never here, I feel, is deeply significant. In this passage, it is stated that the entirety of Buddhism is contained within our own life. The Daishonin concludes that the 80,000 sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha's lifetime and The Buddhas and Bodhisattvas of the Ten Directions and Three Existences are all phenomena inherent within us. The Daishonin goes on to say that as long as we seek enlightenment outside of us, even our performing 10,000 practices and 10,000 good deeds, meaning all of the practices expounded in Shakyamuni's lifetime teachings, and believing in the protection of the Buddhas and the Bodhisattvas throughout the three existences. meaning the benevolent functions of the universe will be in vain. Doing so is as pointless as counting a neighbour's wealth, he states, because we personally gain nothing from doing so. The Daishonin then cites a passage from a T'ien-t'ai school commentary, which states, Unless one perceives the nature of one's life, one cannot eradicate one's grave offences. If we fail to grasp this point, the Daishonin warns, all of the external practices and good deeds we might perform in order to gain enlightenment will ultimately become an endless painful austerity. What does it mean to say that unless we perceive the nature of our old life, we cannot eradicate our grave offences? Grave offences here can be taken to indicate ignorance, which is the source of all evil. The grave offense of slander arises from denigrating the law or the correct teaching of Buddhism as a result of innate darkness or ignorance. In T'ien-t'ai's Buddhism, it is only possible to eradicate this ignorance through the practice of observing one's mind. In other words, through wisdom. In the Daishonin's Buddhism, fundamental darkness is overcome by the sharp sword of faith in accord with the principle of substituting faith for wisdom. This is the essence of the practice of chanting Daimaku. Anyway, to recap, if we seek enlightenment outside of us, We are not pursuing the path of observing one's mind. A path that enables us to overcome the fundamental evil or ignorance or darkness. In that case, all of our efforts and good deeds to attain enlightenment will be missing the vital ingredient. They will be every bit as futile as counting a neighbour's vast riches. Moreover, because none of these efforts will help us eradicate our ignorance, they will only become And endless painful austerity. This battle against ignorance is the heart of Buddhism. It is said that Shakyamuni's enlightenment lay in identifying darkness or ignorance as the fundamental cause of the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death, and in expounding the way for overcoming this ignorance. Therefore, as long as we seek the path to enlightenment outside our own life, whatever practices and good deeds we carry out will deviate from the true essence of Buddhism. Accordingly, the Daishanan says, such students of Buddhism are condemned as non-Buddhist. To seek enlightenment outside our own life is to be defeated by ignorance. An important point in this writing is that the Daishonin warns that we too. People who practice Nitrian Buddhism run the risk of falling into non-Buddhist ways of thinking if we seek the law outside of our own life. Hence, as the Daishonin's disciples, we must always bear in mind his admonition. You must never think that any of the Buddha's teachings are outside yourself. Chanting Daimoku is a practice for revealing the originally inherent mystic truth that exists in all people and achieving Buddhahood in this lifetime. It is an incomparably wonderful practice, in the sense that it represents the means by which all living beings can gain enlightenment. If, however, we forget the Daishonin's admonition to never seek the law outside of us, then no matter how hard we might practice We will lose sight of the correct path to universal enlightenment and effectively wind up practicing a non-Buddhist teaching. That's why the Daishon is so strict on this point. The essence of our practice is to perceive the true nature of our life, our mind To do this, we must wage an inner struggle. If we allow ourselves to be defeated by the three obstacles and four devils, we will not be able to obtain enlightenment. That is why battling the darkness or ignorance within us is an unavoidable part of the process of becoming a Buddha. In other words, whether or not we continuously battle our innate ignorance is the single most important determinant in whether we attain Buddhahood As such, it is something we must never forget. By engaging in the struggle, we can reveal the Buddha wisdom within our life and thereby confront and overcome our ignorance. But, if we fail to undertake the struggle, ignorance will shroud and conceal our Buddha nature. Ignorance deepens and exasperates the five delusive inclinations of greed, anger, foolishness, arrogance, and doubt within us. That is what happens when one succumbs to the belief that the law is outside oneself. This is the end of part one.

--- Chapter 4 (Part 2) ---
This is part two.

Faith for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime

Naturally, the Gohonzon in itself is great beyond measure.

There is the passage from Nichikan Shonen's six-volume writings that states

Even someone who has not yet aroused true faith will still receive immense benefit through connecting with the correct object of devotion, namely the Gohonzon.

The Soka Gakkai, which has inherited the true lineage of faith, is dedicated to widely spreading this infinite and boundless power of the Gohonzon to still countless others.

Faith, as practiced by the Soka Gakkai, entails an active struggle to manifest the mystic law in one's life.

It also produces clear actual proof of benefit.

When we advance together with the Soka Gakkai.

we naturally come to internalize the correct practice of faith as taught by Nietzsche and Dysonen.

Therefore, those who sincerely chant Nam-myohoringe Kyol to the Gohonzon and practice and participate in activities with the Soka Gakkai cannot fail to become Buddhas.

The purpose of faith is to freely realize our full potential and shine in our own unique way.

That's why it's important to keep advancing and challenging ourselves to have the Spirit.

I will exert myself in my practice.

I will deepen my faith.

I will do my best as a member of the Soka Gakkai.

This is the certain path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

With this recognition, let's concretely and strictly apply to our daily practice the Daishonin's admonition.

If you think the law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the mystic law, but an inferior teaching.

To seek the mystic law somewhere outside of us essentially amounts to an evasion of responsibility for our own life.

Practicing the Daishonins Buddhism means not being swayed this way and that.

It means constructing a self that is solid and resolute, like towering Mount Fuji.

But if we neglect this task and focus our energies somewhere else, we can end up veering into a path of seeking the law externally before we are even aware of it.

For example, if we chant to the Gohonzon but always blame other people or our environment for our circumstances.

We are avoiding the challenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance.

By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment outside of us.

It is by changing ourselves on a more profound level that we can begin to improve our situation.

Prayer is the driving force for that change.

It is also important that we don't fall into the trap of practicing dependent faith, where we pin our hopes.

On having our prayers answered through the divine or transcendent powers of gods or Buddhas.

This is a typical example of viewing the law as outside oneself.

The provisional Buddhas of the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings readily lend themselves to this kind of faith, the essence of which is escapism.

Even when they are obviously suffering, people with this kind of dependent faith avoid looking at their problems.

They don't have the courage to make any actual effort to challenge their situation.

Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly engage the gears of our human revolution.

In such a scenario, quite frankly, faith has simply been used as something to hide behind and avoid having to deal with reality.

To use the analogy of mountain climbing, if we just walk around the base of the mountain and never actually make any attempt to ascend its slopes, we'll never reach the summit, no matter how much time passes.

If we avoid challenging our own issues, we'll never be able to strengthen and develop ourselves, and we won't possibly be able to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

In addition, it is also important that we try to rid our lives of general doubt and disbelief, as well as grumbling and complaining.

The erroneous belief that Myo Horengeo, the mystic law, exists outside of our life

has at its core an inability to believe that all people, both ourselves and others, possess the Buddha nature.

and this disbelief stems from fundamental darkness or ignorance.

In terms of attitude and faith, this tendency to sceptically regard the Buddha nature as

A nice ideal, but one that doesn't really change reality, will manifest itself as prayer that is weak, vague, and lacking confidence

If our efforts in faith are half-hearted, we won't be able to change our attitude or fundamentally transform our life

As the Daishonin indicates in this writing when he says, you must summon up deep faith.

If we hope to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, we must continue striving to deepen our faith in prayer.

And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as confident and concrete prayer.

Because our practice of faith is aimed at attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is absolutely essential that we have a solidly focused mind or attitude when chanting Nam-myohoring.

It is like trying to shoot an arrow.

Without a clear target, we don't draw the bow with any real energy or determination.

In the same way, our pray can only be realized when we replace vague yearnings with concrete determinations and confident Daimoku to definitely accomplish what we hope to achieve.

Grumbling and complaining are the principal gateways leading to general doubt and disbelief.

Even if we know that such behaviour is wrong, we may find ourselves doing it in spite of ourselves.

Should grumbling and complaining become habitual, it will act as a constant break on our growth and cause us to forget about advancing and improving ourselves.

When that happens, we effectively close off our own potential, falling into the path of seeking the law outside of us.

While it might be a real challenge to stop grumbling and complaining, the mystic law gives us the wisdom to control these tendencies and use them as a springboard for positive growth and development.

Let's also strictly guard against slandering our fellow members.

Slandering and harbouring resentment and jealousy toward others turns us in the direction of denying their Buddha nature.

Not being able to believe in others' Buddha nature, just like not being able to believe in our own Buddha nature, causes us to stray off course to seek the law externally.

Our Buddha nature is what fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for ourselves and others.

Not to believe in the Buddha nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra.

Which teaches that all people have the potential for Buddhahood.

Consequently, the Daishonin sternly warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra,

Not only will our prayers to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime not be fulfilled, but we will end up committing slander of the law.

Also, unless we practice together united in the spirit of many in body, one in mind, the great desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.

Let us confirm once again that chanting Nammyohoringa Kyol for the happiness of ourselves and others is the true means for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Each person has the potential to become a Buddha.

The spirit of the first three presidents pulses in the Soka Gakkai.

A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of the law in each person's life is one that treasures the individual.

It calls out to each person, encourages their individual human revolution, and seeks to lead all people to enlightenment.

In the appearance of one person after another embracing faith, we find the principle of Bodhisattva steadily emerging from the earth to propagate the law.

and the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.

This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first three presidents

Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei Toda, and myself have steadfastly followed.

That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phenomenal development

and why kosen-rufu has spread throughout the entire world.

In contrast,

Buddhist teachings that view the law as existing outside one's own life tend to be authoritarian or formalistic, disregarding and repressing the people.

They are prone to emphasizing rituals or clerical authority, while their followers passively seek to asage their anxieties through dependence on ceremonies or clergy.

Further, taking advantage of the fact that one of human beings' greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes after

Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have come to function almost exclusively as purveyors of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, devolving into what is known as funeral Buddhism.

They do not offer a philosophy that empowers people or enables them to live their lives better

The Soka Gakkai's founder, President Makiguchi, asserted that Nichraendarson's Buddhism is a teaching for transforming one's life

To believe that the mystic law exists within us is to have the confidence that we will definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Faith also means actively working for kosen-rufu through sharing the Daishonin's Buddhism based on the conviction that it holds the key to happiness for both ourselves and others.

This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and the SGI.

The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the spirit of oneness of mentor and disciple of the first three presidents shine

in their undertaking this most difficult of challenges, that of awakening people to the law within.

President Toda used to say, You should resolve, I am myhorengeo.

The mystic law is the highly effective medicine that relieves the sufferings of all people.

It is also the great treasure storehouse that brings good fortune and happiness to all.

The important thing is to live out our lives based on and completely in sync with the mystic law.

It is to imbue and solidify our lives with the mystic lore.

Our daily realities are filled with an endless succession of problems.

But with the firm belief that our lives are my kyo, we should strive to boldly challenge everything with the unwavering conviction

that we can overcome all hardships and become happy without fail.

When we attain deep faith based on the foundation that

I am Miohorengeol.

We can take on any problem with courage.

The key to victory in life lies in whether or not we can bring forth courage

Not a shrinking timidity, but a challenging courage.

That is what we need to have.

Irrespective of the obstacles we may encounter in the course of our practice, we must not retreat a single step.

We must not be alarmed or startled by them.

The power of the mystic law, Myohoring, can triumph over anything.

It's important to be deeply confident of this.

Fearing hardships and bemoaning and resenting our environment is to live with the belief that the law is outside our own life.

So is losing confidence in our ability to overcome our circumstances and turning to others in the hope that they will save us.

or blaming others for our problems, or giving in to hopelessness and resignation.

When difficulties beset us

No matter how trying they may be, we must clearly see them for the obstacles or devilish functions they are and battle against them without retreating.

This is the way of life of those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and dedicate their lives to the mystic lore.

The Daishonin says, Nichiren's disciples cannot accomplish anything if they are cowardly.

In accord with these words,

Let's cast aside cowardice and make courage our foremost attribute.

People of courageous faith can break through the dark clouds of fear

ignorance and delusion to bring the sun of the mystic law to shine and beautiful flowers of Myohoringe, literally lotus of the Mystic Lore, to bloom in their lives.

President Toda gave the following guidance to the young women's division members in the pioneering days of our movement.

You should take pride in possessing the same life as the Buddha of the latter day.

When in life with a noble spirit, you must absolutely never depreciate yourself.

Nichiren Daishonin's Buddhism starts from the realization that the supreme life condition of Buddhahood exists in each of us.

It is a teaching that makes it possible for us to achieve the most profound inner transformation, a transformation of our fundamental attitude or mindset

That's why the Daishonin emphasizes the importance of our heart or mind.

He writes,

Whether you chant the Buddha's name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of goodness in your life

With this conviction you should strive in faith.

All of our efforts in faith, including our practice of Gonggyo each morning and evening,

and all of our various Gakai activities are virtuous acts that implant benefits and roots of goodness in our lives.

Those who advance with this deep awareness will be true victors who travel the direct path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Always upholding the great philosophy embodied in the Daishonin's word.

It is the heart that is important.

Let us lead magnificent, victorious lives.

--- Chapter 5 ---

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a Brave and

Vigorous SpiritPolishing Our Lives Through Daily

Challenge (5)

The Mystic Nature of Our LivesBecome the

Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind

Master You (6)

Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the

Oneness of Mentor and Disciple (7)

Index

iv

Editors Note

his series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda was published in

SGI-USAs Living Buddhism from the September  October 2006

issue through the March-April 2007 issue.

Please also see The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, pp. 3-5, for

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.

GZ, page number(s)refers to the Gosho zenshu, the Japanese-

language compilation of letters, treatises, essays and oral

teachings of Nichiren Daishonin.

LSOC, page number(s)refers to The Lotus Sutra and Its

Opening and Closing Sutras, translated by Burton Watson

(Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2009).

OTT, page number(s)refers to The Record of the Orally

Transmitted Teachings, translated by Burton Watson (Soka

Gakkai: Tokyo, 2004).

WND, page number(s)refers to The Writings of Nichiren

Datshonin, vol. 1 (WND-1) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 1999) and

vol. 2 (WND-2) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2006).

Sl President Ikeda s Lecture Series

This is is a series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on the writing On Attaining

- Buddhahood i in This Lifetime. He writes, Nichiren Daishonins profound teaching

of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetirne can powerfully transform the age and

opena bright future for our modern world in the twenty-first century.

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

o e e  e @ e e e  6 UO

aN Vat at ae at cat cat cae Ca Cae Uae Cane Cale Cae aes

[1]

Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

The Fundamental Purpose of Life and

@ Source of Hope for Humankind

Ae Ae Ae Aa So a OO  ~ un, 0 Oe

If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have

inally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting

Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate

in all life (7On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3)

ust what constitutes a deeply meaningful life?

What is true happiness? Nichiren Buddhism

is a teaching of hope that enables us to forge

a state of unsurpassed and indestructible happi-

ness and to lead a life of supreme value, while

also helping others do the same.

All people have the potential to attain

Buddhahood; moreover, they can gain that lofty

state just as they are and in fact are assured

of being able to do so in this lifetime. Nichiren

Buddhism clearly elucidates this wonderful path

to enlightenment.

Nichiren Daishonins profound teaching of

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime was 4

Buddhist thought on its head. Indeed, it con-

tinues to shine today as a principle that can

future for our modern world in the twenty-first

century.

Therefore, I look forward to studying

Nichirens writing On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime together with you, as we embark in

high spirits on a new journey of growth and

development toward the Soka Gakkais eightieth

anniversary (in 2010).

The Profound Meaning of

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime is

an important writing that clarifies the basic

theory and practice of Nichiren Buddhism. SGI

members throughout the globe have deepened

their understanding of the essence of Nichiren

Daishonins teachings by earnestly studying this

writing as a guideline for practice and study.

Although the original is no longer extant and

the precise date and name of the recipient are

unknown, this letter is traditionally thought to

have been written around 1255 and addressed to

Toki Jonin.' The assertion that it was composed

in 1255, shortly after Nichiren publicly declared

his teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in 1253, is

credible in view of the letters content, explaining

as it does the significance of chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo in terms of both theory and

The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo is the foundation of Nichirens lifetime of

teachings. Nichiren Buddhism, unlike the estab-

lished Buddhist schools of his day, was not

dedicated to the worship of a specific god or Bud-

dha. Nichiren established the means for all people

to achieve enlightenment, the ideal of the Lotus

Sutra, by formulating the practice of chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which enables us to acti-~

vate our inherent Buddha nature and manifest it

as the life-state of Buddhahood,

In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo has two aspects; the chanting

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and

chanting in terms of practice, Chanting in terms

of faith refers to the spiritual aspect of our prac-

tice. This essentially consists of the struggle we

wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or

darknessa battle against the negative and

destructive forces within us. It means that

through the power of faithin other words,

through strengthening our conviction that we

through the darkness obscuring this awareness,

thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood.

Chanting in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers

to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves

and also teaching it to others. It means making

happiness in the course of our spiritual struggle

against inner negativity and illusion.

When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we

are both chanting the name of, and calling forth,

the Buddha nature in our own lives and the lives

of others. Through applying our practice of faith

to win over doubt and delusion, the power of our

inherent Buddha nature is called forth by the

sound of our chanting and spontaneously mani-

fests in our lives.*

The key point that sets Nichiren Buddhism

apart from the other Buddhist schools of his day

was the establishment of this concrete means

for attaining Buddhahood. And from the time he

first declared Nam-myoho-renge-kyo until the

moment of his death, Nichiren ardently strove to

teach this supreme path of enlightenment to peo-

In the opening passage of On Attaining Bud-

dhahood in This Lifetime, Nichiren clearly and

fully articulates the basic philosophy of enlight-

which exists for the happiness of all humanity: If

you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of

birth and death you have endured since time

without beginning and to attain without fail

unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you

must perceive the mystic truth that is originally

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-

therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth

innate in all life (WND-1, 3).

We'll discuss the profound meaning of this

ye P

me &

by manifesting within us the mystic truth inher-

the endless sufferings of birth and death. The

name of that mystic truth is Myoho-renge-kyo,

and the way to manifest it is through chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

oe OO"

The Significance of Our Existence as Human Beings

Nevertheless, even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you

think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but

an inferior teaching. (\WND-7, 3)

he concept of attaining Buddhahood in

Ti lifetime refers to ordinary people

becoming enlightened during the course

of their present existences. By extension, it means

that they can achieve this just as they are. As such,

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime means

the same thing as attaining Buddhahood in ones

to Buddhahood and illustrated by the example

of the dragon kings daughter in the sutras

Devadatta chapter.

This view contrasts sharply with the pre-

Lotus Sutra teachings, which expound that one

can become enlightened only after practicing

austerities over countless lifetimes. Because the

life-state of Buddhahood is at one with the eter-

nal Mystic Law and abounds with infinite wisdom

and compassion, it tended to be seen as some-

thing completely separate and removed from the

lives of ordinary people steeped in illusion.

Attaining enlightenment was thought to require

overcoming the unfathomably deep chasm

between the spiritual states of a Buddha and ordi-

nary people, and this gave rise to the idea that it

was necessary to carry out austere practices for

innumerable kalpas.*

Nichiren Buddhism clarifies that it is specifi-

cally in this present existence, in which we have

been born as human beings, that we can actualize

the principle of attaining Buddhahood in ones

a

Seikyo Press

Nichiren Daishonin reveals how to actualize this

Drawing an analogy to rice crops, Nichiren

notes that while some ripen early and some ripen

late, they will all mature and be ready for harvest

within the year. He explains that votaries of the

Lotus Sutra will likewise attain Buddhahood in

this existence without fail.

Nichiren places importance on the present

lifetime of human beings. Of course, not only

humans but also all living beings possess the

Buddha nature and have the potential to attain

Buddhahood in their present form, but Nichirens

focus is always first and foremost on the happi-

ness of human beings.

The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted

and rich; it has the capacity for magnificent

achievement. For that very reason, the heart often

undergoes great suffering and torment, and can

become trapped in an endless, downward spiral.

SGI President Ikeda

at Soka University,

Hachioji, Tokyo,

on May 5, 2006.

Will we transmigrate forever along the paths of

an orbit of good?

As evidenced in many of his writings,

Nichiren repeatedly stresses the crucial impor-

tance of the heart, or mind. In this inner realm of

life, the potential resides for dramatic shifts from

Nichirens teaching of enlightenment can be

viewed asa process that begins with inner change.

In other words, through the power of faith, we

can defeat the negative functions inside us that

are governed by the fundamental darkness in all

human hearts and manifest the positive functions

of life that are one with the Dharma natureour

Buddhahood.

This present lifetime, in which we have been

born as human beings, represents a golden

opportunity to ensure that our lives no longer

transmigrate along the evil paths but instead

traverse the paths of good.

Ay Ho Mo Me He & eo Wn Wn an 9 9 "0 9 "0 "0 "os

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Emphasis on Inner Change

Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon up deep

faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. (WND-1, 3)

fons)

Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How

should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (wND-1, 4)

n On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life-

that we cannot achieve enlightenment without

a change in our lives, in our hearts and

minds.

First, he writes that the mystic truth with which

of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single

moment of life and all phenomena (WND-1, 3).

What this means is that our lives or our minds at

a life-state of oneness with the universe.

Also, Nichiren warns that if we seek the Mystic

Law outside ourselves, then no matter how much

we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we cannot

manifest the condition of enlightenment; on the

contrary, our Buddhist practice will only become

an endless, painful austerity (WND-1, 4), He

clearly states: Even though you chant and believe

in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is out-

side yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic

Law but an inferior teaching (WND-1, 3).

Nichiren explains that the key to chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is summoning up deep

faith, or confidence, in the existence of our innate

Buddhahood. He declares that when we do so, we

Can polish our lives and reveal our enlightenment,

writing: Therefore, when you chant myoho and

Tecite renge [that is, chant Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo], you must summon up deep faith that

Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself (literally,

your mind at each moment] (WND-1, 3). He

Continues: Arouse deep faith, and diligently

kyo (WND-1, 4).

In addition, Nichiren speaks of the mystic

teality (WND-1, 4)in other words, the mystic,

inscrutable nature of life, of our hearts and

minds, that manifests as Buddhahood. Here, he

indicates that Myoho-renge-kyo is the wonderful

law of life, of the inner realm of our beings.

On that basis, he asserts that when we chant

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in the

Mystic Law, we can reveal our Buddhahood in this

lifetime. Nichiren writes: The Lotus Sutra is the

king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for

it explains that the entity of our life [literally, our

mind or inner reality], which manifests either good

or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the

Mystic Law. If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with

deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain

Buddhahood in this lifetime (WND-1, 4).

A Teaching of Genuine Humanism

Next, Pll touch on the significance of Nichiren

Daishonins teaching of attaining Buddhahood in

this lifetime from three perspectives.

I'll start by pointing out that through opening

the way for all people to attain Buddhahood in

this lifetime through chanting Nam-myoho-

a teaching of genuine humanism. Opening the

way to enlightenment for all people could be

called the prerequisite for a genuinely humanistic

teligion. This, I believe, is the religious or philo-

sophical significance of the principle of attaining

Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Nichiren had deep insight into the potential

of human beings, discerning that they could free

themselves from a cycle of negative transmigra-

tion and realize a positive one through profound

inner change. And he set forth a practical way to

there is no other teaching that can more

deservedly be called humanistic than Nichiren

Buddhism,

In The True Aspect of All Phenomena,

Nichiren writes: Though it is thought that

Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the three virtues

of sovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake

of all of us living beings, that is not so. On the

contrary, it is common mortals who endow him

with the three virtues (WND-1, 384). This pas-

sage describes a shift from an authoritarian to a

humanistic, people-centered religion. The

teaching of Nichiren, who established the con-

crete means for achieving enlightenment in this

lifetime, makes this shift possible.

When the Soka Gakkais first president,

Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, formulated his theory of

value, he did not include the aspects of holiness

or sacredness, which many thinkers before him

had considered to constitute religious value. For

Mr. Makiguchi, great good was deemed the high-

good, he is referring to the highest value that can

be actualized by human beings and society. In

Mr. Makiguchis theory of value, we find the view

that a true religion is one that serves the welfare of

human beings. Nichirens opening of the path to

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime signifies

the establishment of a religion that contributes

to the happiness of human beings in the greatest

The Significance of Attaining

Buddhahood for Our Lives

Second, by opening the path to attaining Buddha-

hood in this lifetime, Nichiren Daishonin made it

and secure lives that give us the courage and con-

fidence to be self-reliant. This is the significance

of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this

lifetime in terms of our individual lives.

In Nichiren Buddhism, attaining enlightenment

is not about embarking on some inconceivably long

On Attaining Buddhahood in

journey to become a resplendent, godlike Buddha;

it is about accomplishing a transformation in the

depths of ones being. This revolutionary view

of enlightenment fundamentally changed the

Meaning of Buddhist practice from how it was

traditionally viewed.

In other words, it is not a matter of practicing in

order to scale the highest summit of enlightenment

at some point in the distant future. Rather, it is

a constant, moment-to-moment, inner struggle

between revealing our innate Dharma nature or

allowing ourselves to be ruled by our fundamental

darkness and delusion. This unceasing effort to pol-

ish our lives is the essence of Buddhist practice.

The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras,

ta nir 1g Buddhahood for Humanity

This Lifetime

Only by winning over our inner darkness

and negativity can we be victorious in life and

wish to savor true fulfillment. Allow me to

lifetime is the only means to conquer the dark-

ness and delusion that are the fundamental

source of human evil, and cultivate true inde-

and achieve a state of life of boundless happi-

ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood

in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental

&

the direct path to enlightenment, for it

moment, is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law.

If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle, you are

certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states,

After I have passed into extinction, [one] should accept and uphold this sutra.

Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way. Never

doubt in the slightest. (wwp-i, 4)

hird, the principle of attaining Buddhahood

in this lifetime is significant in that it offers

a source of hope to humanity and opens the

way to transforming the destiny of all humankind.

This is its collective or universal significance,

nize that modern civilization has Jost sight of the

human being and become deadlocked on many

fronts. There is no denying that the inner spiritual

are obsessed with seeking comfort, ease and pleasure

in external thingsthings outside of themselves.

Without surmounting the fundamental human

delusions of greed, anger and foolishness, we can-

not solve the many problems that the world faces

today, including the preoccupation with economic

growth, politics that are devoid of humanism,

international conflicts, warfare, growing disparity

a

a", os

between rich and poor, and rampant discrimina-

tion. One conclusion from my dialogues with

leading thinkers is that the only real solution is for

human beings themselves to change, that the sole

key lies in human revolution.

It could further be said that without establish-

ing a correct view of life and death, it is

impossible to conquer inner darkness and delu-

sion at the most fundamental level. Without the

Middle Way view of life and deatha view that

tion and the doctrine of eternitytrue and

lasting happiness cannot be achieved.

The only way for human beings to change is

for them to conquer their inner darkness and

lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all

a change in the destiny of humankind. With that

conviction, we of the SGI have been working to

build a network of good all around the globe.

In the course of these lectures, I will comment

further on the growing expectations and praise for

this unprecedented endeavor we are undertaking.

At the end of On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime, Nichiren Daishonin writes: Never

doubt in the slightest (WND-1, 4). He is telling

us that we should have complete confidence in

the revealing of our Buddhahood in this lifetime.

His words also contain the warning that unless we

maintain this strong confidence, or faith, we can

ing Buddhahood in this lifetime and fall into the

depths of darkness and delusion.

All people at the core of their lives yearn to

attain enlightenment. But there is no teaching

more difficult to believe or understand than the

teaching that we can definitely manifest the state

of Buddhahood in our present existence. We of

the SGI have taken on the challenge of practicing

this profound teaching and sharing it widely with

others around the globe.

In todays world, we, the courageous Bodhi-

sattvas of the Earth, are showing great actual

its destiny. Proud of our noble mission, let us

continue to joyously spread Nichiren Buddhism

with its teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this

lifetime that enables all people to achieve unsur-

and fulfilling lives possible.

S

1, Toki Jonin: A lay follower of Nichiren Daishonin. He lived in Wakamiya,

Katsushika District of Shimosa Province (part of present-day Chiba Prefec-

ture) and served as a retainer to Lord Chiba, He was the recipient of many

of Nichirens writings, including The Object of Devotion for Observing

the Mind, and carefully preserved them.

2. In How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood

through the Lotus Sutra, Nichiren writes: When we revere Myoho-renge-

kyo inherent in our own life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature

within us is summoned forth and manifested by our chanting of Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo, This is what is meant by Buddha. To illustrate, when a

caged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby summoned

and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gather around, the

bird in the cage strives to get out. When with our mouths we chant the

Mystic Law, our Buddha nature, being summoned, will invariably emerge

(WND-1, 887),

3. In Devadatta, the twelfth chapter of the Lotus Sutra, the eight-year-old

daughter of the dragon king Sagara conceives the desire for enlightenment

when she hears Bodhisattva Manjushgi preach the Lotus Sutra, She comes

to offers a jewel to Shakyamuni and instantaneously perfects the bodhi-

sattva practice. She then appears in a land to the south called Spotless

World and manifests the state of Buddhahood without changing her

dragon form and preaches the Lotus Sutra to ail living beings there (see

The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, pp. 226-23).

4. In ancient Indian cosmology, an extremely long period of time.

5. In his writing The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms in a Single

Moment of Life, Nichiren states: Lf votaries of the Lotus Sutra carry out

To cite an analogy, if one plants the fields in spring and summer, then,

whether it be early or late, one is certain to reap a harvest within the year.

Votaries of the Lotus Sutra fall into three categories, superior, middling,

inferior, depending upon their capacities, and yet all will invariably attain

6 For SGI President Ikedas detailed discussion of this passage, see the

December 2004 Living Buddhisrm, p. 25.

7. The doctrine of annihilation is the mistaken attachment to the notion that

life begins with birth and ends with death, According to this view, there is

only the present life, and death represents a complete cessation of existence

both physical and spiritual. The doctrine of eternity is also the mistaken

notion that what exists here in the present is permanent and unchanging.

This view rejects causality, so that neither practicing good nor practicing

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Key Points

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

in Terms of Faith and Practice

In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam-myoho-

myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and chanting in

terms of practice. Chanting in terms of faith refers

to the spiritual aspect of our practice. This essen-

tally consists of the struggle we wage in our hearts

against our inner delusion or darknessa battle

against the negative and destructive forces within

us. It means that through the power of faithin

other words, through strengthening our conviction

that we possess the Buddha naturewe can break

through the darkness obscuring this awareness,

thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood. Chant-

ing in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers to

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves and

also teaching it to others. It means making efforts in

word and deed for our own and others happiness

in the course of our spiritual struggle against inner

negativity and illusion. (p. 3)

The Heart ts Most Important

The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted and rich;

it has the capacity for magnificent achievement. For

that very reason, the heart often undergoes great

forever along the paths of evil, or can we succeed in

directing our lives into an orbit of good? As evi-

denced in many of his writings, Nichiren repeatedly

stresses the crucial importance of the heart, or

for dramatic shifts from evil to good or from good

to evil. That is why Nichirens teaching of enlighten-

ment can be viewed as a process that begins with

inner change. In other words, through the power of

faith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us

that are governed by the fundamental darkness in all

human hearts and manifest the positive functions

of life that are one with the Dharma natureour

Buddhahood. (p. 5)

A Humanistic,

People-centered Religion

Nichiren had deep insight into the potential of

human beings, discerning that they could free them-

selves from a cycle of negative transmigration and

change. And he set forth a practical way to enable all

other teaching that can more deservedly be called

humanistic than Nichiren Buddhism. In The True

Aspect of All Phenomena, Nichiren writes:

Though it is thought that Shakyamuni Buddha

Not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who

This passage describes a shift from an authoritarian

to a humanistic, people-centered religion. The

teaching of Nichiren, who established the concrete

means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime,

makes this shift possible. (p. 7)

The Fundamental Purpose of Our Lives

Only by winning over our inner darkness and neg-

ativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our

full potential. The same is true if we wish to savor

true fulfillment. Allow me to emphasize, then, that

the Nichiren Buddhist practice toward attaining

Buddhahood in this lifetime is the only means to

conquer the darkness and delusion that are the

fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate

true independence. It allows us to construct a solid

self, and achieve a state of life of boundless happi-

ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood in

this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental pur-

Changing the Destiny of All Humanity

The only way for human beings to change is for

them to conquer their inner darkness and redis-

cover the eternal dignity within their own lives.

Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people

are originally endowed will directly lead to a change

in the destiny of humankind, With that conviction,

we of the SGI have been working to build a network

of good all around the globe. (p. 9)

The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through Correct Buddhist Practice

he practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

hes contains immeasurable benefit,

for it enables us to summon forth in our

own lives the limitless power of the Mystic Law,

the fundamental law of the universe.

Nichiren Daishonin actualized happiness for

all humankind through the boundless beneficial

basis for this endeavor is set forth with great sim-

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime: If

you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of

birth and death you have endured since time

without beginning and to attain without fail

unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you

must perceive the mystic truth that is originally

inherent in all living beings. This truth is

Myoho-renge-kyo, Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo

will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic

truth innate in all life (The Writings of Nichiren

Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3).

This passage encapsulates the profound prin-

ciples of Buddhism and the religious revolution

to bring about the enlightenment of all people

that was begun by Shakyamuni Buddha and com-

infused with the sublime wisdom of Buddhism.

To free oneself from the sufferings of birth

and death endured since time without beginning

attain unsurpassed enlightenment constitutes

the profound Buddhist response to these ques-

tions, To perceive the mystic truth inherent in all

living beings is this response further refined and

deepened based on the philosophy of the Lotus

Sutra. And chanting Myoho-renge-kyo refers to

the practice established by Nichiren to enable all

1]

h On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime a

Buddhist wisdom into than two millennia, and the compassion and

actice is the fruit wisdom for leading all people to enlightenment

s found in Nichiren Buddhism.

a The purpose of this installment is to confirm

that Nichirens practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

kyo represents the ultimate form of correct

| practice, and that its establishment

sm that makes it possible for all

1 to achieve the same enlightened state

d death you have

fail unsurpassed

tic truth that is orig-

se-kyo, Chanting

tic truth innate in

nt Daishonint, vol. 1, p. 3)

s reference to the suffer-

h endured since time

mised on the concept of

ing to which living beings

ffering-filled cycle of

yn ag Og On On "5 hn 5 bn Os 0 Oe ho Eee 4

birth and death that continues from the infinite

this never-ending round of suffering ultimately

arises from earthly desires, and that a negative

cycle of earthly desires, karma and suffering is

the sufferings of birth and death endured since

time without beginning also represents an inter-

minable succession of illusion and suffering.

Because the thought of such endless transmi-

gration is ultimately unbearable, people naturally

came to wish for a way to put an end to this

of delusion and suffering.

In Buddhism, there are two basic approaches to

liberation from the suffering of this cycle. One

view holds that people can free themselves from

the endless karmic cycle of birth and death by

other is the Mahayana approach, in which the

viewed as a transient, impermanent phenomenon.

The Mahayana teachings, for example, espouse

the concept of undergoing the cycle of birth and

death in accordance with the bodhisattva vow to

guide living beings to enlightenment; or they view

the oscillation between birth and death as a cycle

of emerging from and returning to the funda-

mental, all-embracing life of the universe. The

latter view can be easily understood using the

metaphor of waves on the ocean: birth is like a

wave appearing on the surface of the oceanthe

life of the universewhile death is the wave sub-

merging back into that ocean. Gaining such an

understanding of the essence of our own lives,

which repeat the cycle of birth and death, is to

attain unsurpassed enlightenment, the highest

awakening of the Buddha.

The Mystic Truth Embraces

and Is Inherent in All Things

In this passage, to perceive the mystic truth that is

originally inherent in all living beings means to

attain unsurpassed enlightenment. The wisdom

to apprehend this universally inherent truth repre-

sents the supreme enlightenment of the Buddha.

The point where Buddhism radically departs

from many other philosophies and religions is

that it uncovered within the individuals own life

the Law, or limitless inner power, for resolving all

suffering on the most essential level. A Buddha is

one who, based on this Law, has attained the ulti-

mate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to

suffering and construct indestructible happiness.

Buddhism is a teaching of unparalleled

humanism that stresses the boundless potential

within human beings. Thats why it is called the

internal way.

To perceive the mystic truth that is originally

inherent in all living beings is to attain unsur-

freeing oneself from the sufferings of birth and

death endured since time without beginning.

This is Shakyamunis starting point, and the

the Lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people can

attain enlightenment. The Lotus Sutra could be

said to embody the ultimate principle of respect

for human dignity.

In this writing, Nichiren Daishonin says that

the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all

living beings is the principle of the mutually

inclusive relationship of a single moment of life

and all phenomena. This latter principle refers to

the inscrutable relationship that exists between |

13

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

ourselvesour minds or each life-momentand

the universe; its meaning is that all phenomena

are contained in ones life and that ones life

doubt corresponds in meaning to the principle

of inherence and pervasion articulated by

Nichikan, an early eighteenth-century restorer

of Nichiren Buddhism, in describing the doc-

trine of three thousand realms in a single

moment of life

The cosmic life enfolds and pervades every-

thing, and because it does so, it is also inherent in

all things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our

individual lives lies at the heart of the principle

of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single

tmoment of life and all phenomena. To awaken to

this mystic truth is to attain the Buddhas unsur-

The question is how to enable all people to per-

ceive this mystic truth that is originally

Buddhism will not be possible if only a very

limited number of people can follow the way set

forth for apprehending the mystic truth. Before

Nichiren Daishonin, the Great Teacher Tien-

tai of China tried to establish the means for

tice of observing the mind, also known as the

not a means readily accessible to the people of

the Latter Day of the Law.

The initial step Nichiren took in opening the

great path to universal enlightenment was to

name the mystic truth. The universally inherent

mystic truth originally had no name, but as

Nichiren explains in The Entity of the Mystic

Law, a sage awakened to this truth in his own life

14

could give it the most appropriate name (sce

WND-1, 421).? Naming something is a creative

making that essence available to all people; it

In On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life-

time, as indicated by the passage the mystic

truth that is originally inherent in all living beings

is Myoho-renge-kyo, Nichiren states that this

mystic truth that constitutes the fundamental

Law of the universe is none other than Myoho-

tenge-kyo. Strictly speaking, the term Myoho-

Lotus Sutra, but Nichiren was the first to identify

Myoho-renge-kyo as being the name of the prin-

ciple of the true aspect of all phenomena,

which the Lotus Sutra teaches is the profound

wisdom of all Buddhas. Also, although the Life

Span chapter of the Lotus Sutra expounds the

life of the eternal Buddha from the standpoint of

Shakyamuni, it was Nichiren who first revealed

that the essence of the Buddhas eternal lifethe

heart of the Life Span chapteris Myoho-

Observing the Mind, WND-1, 371).

The eternal Buddha, since attaining enlighten-

ment in the remote past, repeatedly undergoes the

cycle of birth and death as a Buddha while appear-

ing in various forms within the Ten Worlds for the

Salvation of all living beings. The Life Span chap-

ter reveals that living beings of the Ten Worlds

(including Buddhas), and the phenomena of birth

and death as well, are all manifestations of the great

that the heart of the Life Span chapter is Myoho-

zenge-kyo, we can infer that Myoho-renge-kyo is

the name of the great, eternal, universal life that is

Living beings in the nine worlds, repeatedly

undergoing birth and death, also follow the

submerging back into the great eternal life that _ that is originally inherent in all living beings.

is Myoho-renge-kyo. They are embraced by It was Nichiren who first declared that

Myoho-renge-kyo, and at the same time possess | Myoho-renge-kyo is to be chanted and spread in

Myoho-renge-kyo within them. This is why _ the Latter Day of the Law.

~% eo, LLM LLM. ELL APG CoP CP "6g Cd eo 6 t~Astetcege'. &

"Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo To Perceive the Mystic Truth

and Establish the Buddhism of the People

The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, true and correct in both word and prin-

ciple. Its words are the ultimate reality, and this reality is the Mystic Law

(myoho). It is called the Mystic Law because it reveals the principle of the

mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena.

That is why this sutra is the wisdom of all Buddhas.

Life at each moment encompasses the body and mind and the self and

beings in the three thousand realms, including plants, sky, earth, and even

the minutest particles of dust. Life at each moment permeates the entire realm

of phenomena and is revealed in all phenomena. To be awakened to this

and all phenomena. (WND-1, 3)

ichiren Daishonins next step in opening

Ne great path was to establish the prac-

tice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

He appended the word nama transliteration of

the Sanskrit word namas, meaning devotion

to the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo, and

Nam means to dedicate ones life. Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo aloud represents a deter-

mination and vow to dedicate ones life to the

word and deed.

15

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

At the same time, chanting Nam-myoho-

of life based on the universal truth of Myoho-

myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism is not

simply intoning the name of an external truth. It

constitutes a practice to actually summon forth

the inner truth that pervades the universe and our

own selves and live our lives in accord with that

truth. This practice could be described as a

and tapping from within the mystic truth origi-

nally inherent in all living beings.

Looking back on the history of Buddhism,

awakening to this mystic truth, over time people

lost sight of its existence within their own lives.

Tt was in that context that Tien-tai established

the meditative practice for observing the mind

based on the principles of three thousand

by Shin Yatomi

g of freedom and

ce and confidence,

ing of faith and

_ By applying the

ated in this small

itional value of all

; not. You will be

Buddhist sense

lable at your local SGILUSA

bookstore or from:

300) 626-1313 * bookstore,sgirusa,Org

ally inclusive relationship of a single moment of

life and all phenomena. He thereby sought to

Buddhahood. Tien-tais meditation of observ-

ing the mind could be viewed as an appropriate

Lotus Sutra.

Further, in order to enable all people to

inherent in all living beings, Nichiren gave it the

name Myoho-renge-kyo and established the prac-

tice of invoking that namethe practice of

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. By doing so, he

opened the way for all people to dedicate their

lives to and live based on the mystic truth.

Thus Nichiren established the means by

which all people can awaken to the truth of life

and the universe within their own lives and

actively manifest that truth. Moreover, this truth

is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is

teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on

that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value.

Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth

accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no mat-

ter what his or her background. It would be no

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism

gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This prac-

tice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist

tally transform our lives.

In other words, to chant Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo is to summon forth our own innate

Buddhahood. It is the direct path to manifesting

Ag Og Og 5 0 hn 5 5 a tM

that highest state of life. The wisdom and com-

chanting enriches our life-condition, and brings

happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as

more and more people come to chant Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves

and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance

of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha

and to ultimately transform even the destiny of

humankind.

Salute to the Rise of the

Buddhism of the Sun

Another point we should bear in mind regarding

the true meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is

that it is also the name of the life of the Buddha

of the Latter Day, Nichiren Daishonin. Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo and the life of the original

Buddha are indivisibly connected. We could say

that the fundamental truth of Myoho-renge-kyo

that pervades life and the universe was only iden-

tified and established for the first time through

Nichiren himself practicing it and manifesting it

in his behavior. He gave concrete expression to

the Law that people had not been able to perceive

up to that point,

Nichirens life as the Buddha of the Latter Day

isa life dedicated to battling evil and vanquishing

ignorance. The struggle to free people from all

misfortune and misery in the worldfrom all

negative karma and the sufferings of birth, aging,

sickness and deathultimately entails battling

the fundamental darkness or ignorance that gives

17

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

As Nichiren indicates when he says that the

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the hap-

of kosen-rufu clears the clouds of ignorance

(see The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms,

WND-2, 85), Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly has

the power to dispel lifes darkness. When we

chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the sun of Bud-

dhahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and

delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the sun,

are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood

comes to shine within us, the darkness of

ignorance vanishes.

But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching in

which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a

teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of

Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We

In this regard, Nichikan writes: When one

chants Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, ones life imme-

diately becomes the object of devotion of three

thousand realms in a single life-moment. It

becomes the life of Nichiren Daishonin.* The

the supreme path to attaining Buddhahood

through which each person can become a shining

sun in his or her own right.

The great nineteenth-century Russian poet

Aleksandr Pushkin sings: Before the bright

dawn, even so / Shall flicker and die every

sophistry jaded / At reasons unperishing spark. /

Salute to the sunrise, and vanish the dark!

Nichiren Buddhism is the Buddhism of the

sun that opens the path of lifes supreme victory

for all humankind. With Salute to the sunrise!

as our rallying cry, let us dynamically advance in

the struggle to dispel the darkness of ignorance in

@

1. Commenting on T'sen-t'ai's words, The three thousand realms exist in life

at each moment. Nachiken writes m his Six-Volume Writings The intent

of {the Lorus Sutra] 3 to reveal the principle of inherence and pervasion.

According to this prinaple, all phenomena inhere im a single moment of

dite, and  single moment of life pervades all phenomena.

When the sagt was observmg the principle and assigning names to all

things, he perceived thar there is this wonderful single Law {myoho| that

mimultancously possesses both cause and effect |renge|, and he named it

Myobo-renge. This single Law that is Myoho-renge encompasses within it

obtain both the cause and the effect of Buddhahood simultaneously (The

Ensity of the Mystic Law, WND-1,421).

4, True aspect of all phenomena: The ultimate truth or reality that permeates

ail phenomens and is in no way separate from them. A principle expressed

in Expedient Means, the second chapter of the Lotus Sutra. In the writ-

ing titled The True Aspect of All Phenomena, Nichiten defined all

and the true aspect as the Law of Myoho-renge-kyo, the ultimate reality

Worlds. All phenomena, he stated, are manifestations of this universal Law:

Expedient Means chapter clarifics the truth that all people are inherently

18

this potential.

4. The Ten Worlds are ten distinct realms or categories of beings referred to in

Buddhist scriptures. From the lowest to the highest, the realms of (1) hell,

(2) hungry spirits, (3) animals, (4) asuras, (5) human beings, (6) heavenly

beings, (7) voice-hearers, (8) cause-awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and

(10) Buddhas. From the standpoint of the Lotus Sutra, the Ten Worlds indi-

cates ten potential states or conditions that a person can manifest or

the worlds other than Buddhas.

5, Nichiren writes: Therefore, when once we chant Myoho-renge-kyo, with

just that single sound we summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of

all Buddhas; all existences; all bodhisattvas; all voice-hearers; all the deities

such as Brahma, Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and the myriad

stars; the heavenly gods and earthly deities, on down to hell-dwellers,

hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human and heavenly beings, and all other

living beings. This blessing is immeasurable and boundless (How Those

Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus

Sutra, WND-1, 887).

6. Commentary on the The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind, in

Nichikan Shonin mondanshu (The Commentaries of Nichikan Shonin)

(Tokyo: Seikyo Shimbunsha, 1980), p. 548.

7 Aleksandr Pushkin, Pushkin Threefold: Narrative, Lyric, Polemic, and Ribald

Verse, translated by Walter Arndt (New York: E, P. Dutton and Co., Inc,

1972), p. 20,

=,

Key Points

Uncovering Peoples Inner Potential

The point where Buddhism radically departs from

many other philosophies and religions is that it

uncovered within the individuals own life the Law,

or limitless inner power, for resolving all suffering

on the most essential level. A Buddha is one who,

based on this Law, has attained the ultimate wis-

dom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and

construct indestructible happiness. Buddhism is a

teaching of unparalleled humanism that stresses

the boundless potential within human beings.

Thats why it is called the internal way. (p. 13)

The Mystic Truth of Life

and the Universe

The cosmic life enfolds and pervades everything,

and because it does so, it is also inherent in all

things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our indi-

vidual lives lies at the heart of the principle of the

mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment

of life and all phenomena. To awaken to this mys-

tic truth is to attain the Buddhas unsurpassed

The Meaning of Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables each per-

son to actualize a way of life based on the universal

truth of Myoho-renge-kyo. The crucial point in

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren

Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an

summon forth the inner truth that pervades the

universe and our own selves and live our lives in

accord with that truth, This practice could be

described as a process of establishing a self capable

of activating and tapping from within the mystic

truth originally inherent in all living beings. (p. 16)

Establishing a Buddhism of the People

Nichiren established the means by which all people

can awaken to the truth of life and the universe

within their own lives and actively manifest that

truth, Moreover, this truth is the enlightened

wisdom of all Buddhas and is revealed in the Lotus

Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism.

By basing ourselves on that truth, we can lead lives

of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this

time, no matter what his or her background. It

would be no exaggeration to say that the practice

of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren

Buddhism gave rise to a Buddhism of the people.

This practice of chanting is indeed the supreme

Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fun-

damentally transform our lives. (p. 17)

The Direct Path to

Manifesting Buddhahood

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to summon

forth our own innate Buddhahood. It is the direct

wisdom and compassion of a Buddha that emerges

through chanting enriches our life-condition, and

brings happiness to ourselves and others. Further,

as more and more people come to chant Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves

and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance

of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha

and to ultimately transform even the destiny of

humankind. (p. 17)

Causing the Sun of

Buddhahood To Rise Within

As Nichiren indicates when he says that the Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the happiness of self

and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu

clears the clouds of ignorance (see The Doctrine

of the Three Thousand Realms, WND-2, 85), Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo truly has the power to dispel lifes

darkness. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

the sun of Buddhahood rises in our hearts. The igno-

sun, are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood

comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance

vanishes, But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching

in which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a

teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of

Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We are

truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same bril-

liant life-state of Buddhahood as Nichiren. (p. 18)

19

If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself,

You Are Not Embracing the Mystic Law

are ae ae Ware Cale Sal Cale wale  ~ . -, ~~ -, 674 &

Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law

is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior

teaching Inferior teaching means those [Buddhist teachings] other than this

[Lotus] sutra, which are all expedient and provisional. No expedient or provi-

sional teaching leads directly to enlightenment, and without the direct path to

after lifetime for countless kalpas. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is

then impossible. Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge,' you must

summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. (On Attaining

Buddhahood in This Lifetime, The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3)

mune with the Mystic Law, It is a Buddhist

At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the

inner darkness that prevents this fusion from tak-

ing place. When, through our practice of faith, we

Te chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to com-

20

vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance

and become one with the Mystic Law, its infinite

able benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

The essence of this practice established and

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo filled with a seeking

spirit to continually develop our faith or confi-

dence in its power. It is the heart that is

important, Nichiren asserts (The Strategy of the

Lotus Sutra, WND-1, 1000). When it comes to

chanting, therefore, we should above all strive to

summon forth the courage with which to over-

come illusion without being defeated by the

three obstacles and four devils.?

Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the ultimate

mystic truth, and Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the

name of the life-state of Buddhas who embody

and reveal this truth. Thus, when we chant Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo with conviction, the infinite

benefit of Myoho-renge-kyo unfolds in our lives.

This is what it means to bring forth the world of

Buddhahood.

At work here is the principle of cause and

is the cause and manifesting the life-state of Bud-

dhahood is the effect. When we continue

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo through times

of both suffering and joy while striving for our

own happiness and that of others, we can estab-

lish as the core and innermost essence of our lives

the benefit of the cause and effect for attaining

Buddhahoodwhich are themselves contained

within the practice of chanting. When we do so,

the indomitable state of Buddhahood emerges

within us. This is the meaning of attaining Bud-

dhahood in this lifetime

In his treatise The Object of Devotion for

Observing the Mind, Nichiren states: Shakya-

muni Buddha, who has attained perfect

and marrow (WND-1, 365). He explains that to

ye & "9 & "4 & "a  '5 & 9g bg bn Os hn bn Og "5 Oe Oe Ot |

myoho-renge-kyo enables us to actualize cause

and effect in a single moment of lifethat is,

faith (cause) leading to the manifestation of our

Buddhahood (effect).

Considered in this light, ones voice chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the voice of unshak-

able faith and seeking spirit that breaks through

the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and

sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is

also the courageous lions roar that issues forth

from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of

chanting.

The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is

not only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is

also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we

should always try to chant resoundingly, with a

vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop-

ing horse.

It can also be said that the chanting of Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which we affirm

that we ourselves are inherently entities of

Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to

innate life force that we have possessed from time

without beginning.

Nichiren declares: There is no true happiness

for human beings other than chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo (Happiness in This World,

WND-1, 681). This happiness, he says, is the

boundless joy of the Law. Joy of the Law

describes the unshakable happiness and peace

of mind inherent in all existence. To experience

this joy means to fully savor and enjoy the infi-

nite life force that is one with the Mystic Law.

Nichiren explains that the only way for us to

taste the joy of the Mystic Law is through chant-

ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

21

The Mystic Law and

Incomplete Teachings

Given that chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has

such profound meaning, it is crucial to remember

when we chant that Myoho-renge-kyo is our lives

themselves. If we lose sight of this point, then no

matter how much we may chant, we will have

departed from the practice of chanting taught by

Therefore, in On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime, Nichiren writes in stern warning,

Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-

you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an infe-

incomplete The Mystic Lawis the ultimate truth

that is perfect and complete; in contrast, an incom-

The above passage contains a profound phi-

losophy that overcomes one of the serious pitfalls

to which religion tends to succumb, It also

ing genuine happiness.

Religion is generally held to be a universal

nite, absolute and sacred. While in a sense this may

be true, it seems that many religions postulate

from the outset a separation between the secular

and the sacred, and between human beings and

gods or Buddhas, and thus seek to bridge that gap.

Nichiren, however, regards teachings that view

the absolute or sacred as separate from human

beings as incomplete, And he cites as an example

the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, which

do not set forth the principles or practices that

this lifetime. Rather, they espouse that one must

first undergo innumerable kalpas* of austere

22

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

In the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings,

a Virtually insurmountable gulf exists between

Buddhas and ordinary people. Only a very few

undergone austerities for countless kalpas, can

Moreover, according to these teachings, it is

inconceivable for someone who has become a

Buddha to go back to being an ordinary person.

Asa rule, according to these teachings, the world

where Buddhas dwell is not this strife-filled saha

world where ordinary people reside. Buddhas and

ordinary people are completely separate. There-

fore, as long as that divide exists between the

world of Buddhahood and the nine worlds (the

that there is no way for all people to attain

thus leaving ordinary people with no option but

to aspire for salvation through the assistance or

intervention of such Buddhas.

This perceived separation between the nine

worlds and the world of Buddhahood is demol-

ished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of three

thousand realms in a single moment of life

in other words, the teaching that the nine

worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and

that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds

(The Selection of the Time, WND-1, 539).'

Here we can see the immense importance of the

Lotus Sutra principle of the mutual possession

of the Ten Worlds.

Nichiren opened the way to actualizing this

latter principle, which is the key to attaining Bud-

dhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the

constitutes in its fullest and most complete form

the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlighten-

ment for all human beings.

Summoning Forth and Manifesting

the Buddha Nature

The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the

universe. Its universality transcends our individ-

ual selves. As indicated by its description as the

mystic truth that is originally inherent in all liv-

ing beings, however, the Mystic Law also exists

within our lives (On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime WND-1, 3). It both resides within

us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic

Law is inherent in our lives because it is the all-

universe,

In his writing How Those Initially Aspiring

to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the

Lotus Sutra, Nichiren explains the essence of

Myoho-renge-kyo as follows: As for the meaning

of Myoho-renge-kyo: The Buddha nature inher-

SGI President Ikeda with

Brazilian Association of

Municipalities President

Jos do Carmo Garcia,

Tokyo, July 20, 2006.

Brahma, Shakra, and the other deities; the Bud-

dha nature of Shariputra, Maudgalyayana, and

the other voice-hearers; the Buddha nature of

Manjushri, Maitreya, and the other bodhisattvas;

and the Mystic Law that is the enlightenment of

the Buddhas of the three existences, are one and

identical. This principle is called Myoho-renge-

kyo (WND-1, 887).

Not only is Myoho-renge-kyo our own Bud-

dha nature, he says, but it is also the Buddha

nature of all heavenly deities, voice-hearers,

bodhisattvas and so on. Moreover, this Buddha

nature is identical to the Mystic Law to which the

Buddhas of the three existencespast, present

and futureare enlightened.

Nichiren then goes on to explain that the

chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a practice

in which we summon forth and manifest the

Buddha nature inherent in the lives of all beings of

the Ten Worlds; Therefore, when once we chant

23

Myoho-renge-kyo, with just that single sound we

summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of

all Buddhas; all existences; all bodhisattvas; all

voice-hearers; all the deities such as Brahma,

Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and

the myriad stars; the heavenly gods and earthly

deities, on down to hell-dwellers, hungry spirits,

animals, asuras, human and heavenly beings, and

all other living beings. This blessing is immeasur-

able and boundless (WND-1, 887).

Regarding the meaning of chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo, he further states: When we

life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature

within us is summoned forth and manifested by

what is meant by Buddha (WND-1, 887). The

Mystic Law.

Nichiren uses a wonderful metaphor to

ing the inner Buddha nature: When a caged bird

sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby

summoned and gather around, and when the

birds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in

the cage strives to get out (WND-1, 887).

The singing of the caged bird refers to the

chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo by ordinary

tal darkness and earthly desires, arouse faith in

the Mystic Law. In other words, it is the chanting

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith, which is

obstacles and become happy without fail through

the power of the Mystic Law,

The power of such strong, determined chant-

ing calls forth the Buddha nature in all living

beings. Not only does the Buddha nature of

Brahma and Shakra and of the Buddhas and

24

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

bodhisattvas throughout the universe manifest,

but those chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can

also sever the chains of fundamental darkness

and illusion, and reveal their own Buddha nature.

In other words, it is the power of our voices

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that connects

our lives with the Mystic Law pervading all phe-

nomena of the three thousand realms.

In Letter to Niike, Nichiren further explains

the significance of chanting through the analogy

of a mother bird and an egg.' He says that the

chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is like the

warmth of the mother bird (WND-1, 1030). At

first there is nothing inside the egg but liquid, but

as a result of being warmed by the mother bird,

the beak, eyes and feathers are formed. Eventually,

the baby bird breaks through the shell and hatches,

and is soon flying into the sky like its mother. In

this analogy, the substance within the egg repre-

sents the Buddha nature of living beings, while

the mother bird represents the Buddha who leads

others to enlightenment. The chanting of Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo is at once the voice of faith of

ordinary people and a function of the life-state of

Buddhahood.

Nichirens most important admonition in

ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that we must not

view the Law as something outside ourselves. If

we think the Law exists externally, then we are

and ordinary people found in the pre-Lotus Sutra

teachings.

Perceiving That One's Own Life

Is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has

immeasurable beneficial power. Josei Toda, the

second Soka Gakkai president, described the infi-

nite power of the Mystic Law as follows: It is like

lying sprawled on your back in a wide-open space

looking up at the sky, All that you wish for imme-

diately appears. No matter how much you may

give away, there is always more. It is never

of life.

Indeed, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can be likened

to a wish-granting jewel. How can we develop the

boundless state of life that enables us to bring forth

whatever strength is necessary? President Toda

Often used to say, If you really want to achieve such

a state of life, you have to fight with every ounce of

your being for the Lotus Sutra, for kosen-rufu!

Such was the vast and untrammeled spirit of

my mentor: the spirit to strive forever together

with the Buddhas of the three existences and with

the life-affirming functions of the universe such

as Brahma and Shakra, wherever in the universe

we might find ourselves; the spirit to actualize a

world of happiness and peace dedicated to value

creation, by helping people overcome misery and

misfortune and the sufferings of birth, aging,

sickness and death.

Throughout everything, Mr. Toda steadfastly

continued to seek the Law that exists nowhere

but within our own lives. And he stressed the

importance of living true to oneself. His starting

the Buddha is life itself and his awakening to his

identity as a Bodhisattva of the Earth.

He also often spoke of the spirit of faith

we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law with-

in us, saying: You have to be resolved that

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is your own life! or

Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day

a

oS aN Dae Ca Wale CaN aie Cale Cadel Cate Cait OOO OE Cale

means firmly believing that your life is nothing

apart from Nam-myoho-renge-kyo! This is the

spirit Nichiren teaches in the passage, When you

chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon

up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life

itself (On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life-

time, WND-1I, 3).

A Universal Religion for the

Happiness of All Humankind

Generally speaking, religions expound some infi-

nite and eternal entity that transcends both human

beings and the impermanence of this world, using

such terms as God or law. Different religions regard

this infinite and eternal entity variously as a source

of fear and awe, an object of adoration, a great void

of emptiness or a wellspring of all-embracing love.

Nichiren Daishonin saw the power of the

Mystic Law that encompasses and sustains all

things in the universe as existing within human

beings, and he established a means for actually

manifesting that Law in their lives.

During my second lecture at Harvard Univer-

sity (in September 1993), I proposed three areas

where Mahayana Buddhism could contribute to

modern civilization: (1) in fostering the creation

of peace; (2) in paving the way toward the restora-

tion and rejuvenation of humanity; and (3) in

coexistence of all things. In connection with the

second point, I stressed the important significance

of the approach of Nichiren Buddhism, which

teaches neither an exclusive reliance on the power

of self nor on the power of other. This perspec-

tive has resonated deeply with many scholars.

25

Only by communing and fusing with the

our limited, finite selvescan we wholly activate

the power of self. At the same time, however, this

People are certainly self-empowered, and yet

they are not self-empowered . . . People are cer-

tainly other-empowered, and yet they are not

other-empowered (The Meaning of the Sacred

Teachings of the Buddha's Lifetime, WND-2,

62)." What this means, I believe, is that by relying

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

neither exclusively on the power of other nor on

the power of self, we can manifest the power that

ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to do this.

In this way, Nichiren Buddhism opens up a

broad new vision of a universal religion for the

happiness of all humankindone that tran-

scends the approach of teachings that strictly

divide external power and the individuals own

name or title, of the Mystic LawNam-myoho-renge-kyo.

2. Various obstacies and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that

aq result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith.

Chanting |

This is the principle of embracing the Gohonzon is in itself

maining enlightenment

5, Boundless joy of the Law: This refers to the benefit one obtains from

Buddha In his writing Happiness in This World, Nichiren states:

There is no true happiness for human beings other than chanting

beings enjoy themselves at ease [The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening

and Closing Sutras, p. 272}. How could this passage mean anything

but the boundless joy of the Law? (WND-1, 681),

of a small kalpa at approximately sixteen million years, According

to Buddhist cosmology, a world repeatedly undergoes four stages:

formation, continuance, decline and disintegration, Each of these

four stages lasts for twenty small kalpas and is equal to one medium

kalpa. Finally, one complete cycle forms a major kalpa.

7. The Ten Worlds are ten distinct realms or categories

the realms of {1) hell, (2) hungry spirits, (3) animals, (4) asuras, (5)

human beings, (6) heavenly beings, (7) voice-hearers, (8) cause-

awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and (10) Buddhas. The Lotus

Sutra teaches that each of the Ten Worlds contains all ten within it,

26

making it possible to interpret them as potential states of life inher-

& The nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and Buddha-

hood retains the nine worlds: This means that that the lives of

beings in the nine worldsthe worlds from hell through to bodhi-

sattvaare endowed with the world of Buddhahood, and that the

lives of Buddhas are also endowed with the nine worlds. In other

words, ordinary people and Buddhas are essentially the same with

no distinction between them.

9. Three thousand realms in a single moment of life is a philosophical

system established by Tien-tai. The three thousand realms indi-

cates the varying aspects and phases that life assumes at each

moment. At each moment, life manifests one of the Ten Worlds.

Each of these worlds possesses the potential for all ten within itself,

thus making one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred

worlds the ten factors and operates within each of the

three realms of existence, thus making three thousand realms.

10. Nichiren Daishonin writes: A birds egg contains nothing but liq-

uid, yet by itself this develops into a beak, two eyes, and all the

other parts, and the bird soars into the sky. We, too, are the eggs of

ignorance, which are pitiful things, but when nurtured by the

chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which is like the warmth of

the mother bird, we develop the beak of the thirty-two features

and the feathers of the eighty characteristics [of the Buddha] and

are free to soar into the sky of the true aspect of all phenomena

and the reality of all things (Letter to Niike, WND-1, 1030).

11.Nichiren Daishonin states: Now in the teachings of the Lotus

Sutra, people are certainly self-empowered, and yet they are not

self-empowered, This is because ones own self, or life, at the same

time possesses the nature of all living beings in the Ten Worlds.

Therefore this self has from the beginning been in the possession of

ones own realm of Buddhahood and of the realms of Buddhahood

Buddhahood one does not take on some new or other Buddha

Again, in the teachings of the Lotus Sutra, people are certainly

other-empowered, and yet they are not other-empowered. The

Buddhas, who are considered separate from us, are actually con-

tained within our own selves, or the lives of us ordinary people.

Those Buddhas manifest the realms of Buddhahood of all living

beings in the same manner as we do (The Sacred Teachings of the

Buddha's Lifetime, WND-2, 62).

Key Points

The Meaning of Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to commune

with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist practice for

fusing our lives with this Law. At the same time, it

is a battle to conquer the inner darkness that pre-

vents this fusion from taking place. When, through

our practice of faith, we vanquish this darkness of

illusion and ignorance and become one with the

Mystic Law, its infinite power unfolds in our lives.

Such is the immeasurable benefit of chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, (p. 20)

The Cause and Effect of

Attaining Buddhahood

The power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

moment of lifethat is, faith (cause) leading to

the manifestation of our Buddhahood (effect).

Considered in this light, ones voice chanting

Nam-myoho- renge-kyo is the voice of unshakable

faith and seeking spirit that breaks through the

inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and

sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is

also the courageous lions roar that issues forth

from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of

chanting. (p. 21)

Chanting Like a Galloping Horse

The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is not

only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is also

the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we

should always try to chant resoundingly, with a

vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop-

ing horse. It can also be said that the chanting

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which

we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities

of Myoho-renge-kyo, It represents a struggle to

innate life force that we have possessed from time

without beginning, (p, 21)

- ge

Bridging the Gap Between

Buddhas and Ordinary People

This perceived separation between the nine worlds

and the world of Buddhahood is demolished by

the Lotus Sutra doctrine of three thousand realms

in a single moment of lifein other words, the

teaching that the nine worlds have the potential

for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the

nine worlds (The Selection of the Time? WND-1,

539). Here we can see the immense importance of

the Lotus Sutra principle of the mutual possession

of the Ten Worlds. Nichiren opened the way to

actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by estab-

lishing the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

complete form the teaching of Buddhism that

seeks enlightenment for all human beings. (p. 22)

Manifesting Our Inner Power

That Transcends Us

The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the uni-

verse. Its universality transcends our individual

selves. As indicated by its description as the mystic

truth that is originally inherent in all living beings,

however, the Mystic Law also exists within our lives

(On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,

WND-1, 3). It both resides within us and transcends

us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in

our lives because it is the all-embracing Law that

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

ls Your Own Life!

(Mr. Toda] also often spoke of the spirit of faith we

need in order to perceive the Mystic Law within us,

saying: You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho-

Mystic Law in the Latter Day means firmly believing

that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myoho-

you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-

kyo is your life itself (On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime, WND-1, 3). (p. 25)

27

Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude

Refusing To Live an Endless, Painful Austerity

Pee ee 0

You must never think that any of the eighty thousand sacred teachings of

Shakyamuni Buddha's lifetime or any of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the

ten directions and three existences are outside yourself. Your practice of the

Buddhist teachings will not relieve you of the sufferings of birth and death in

the least unless you perceive the true nature of your life. If you seek enlighten-

ment outside yourself, then your performing even ten thousand practices and

ten thousand good deeds will be in vain. It is like the case of a poor man who

spends night and day counting his neighbor's wealth but gains not even half a

coin. That is why the Tien-tai schools commentary states, Unless one per-

ceives the nature of ones life, one cannot eradicate ones grave offenses.! This

tice will become an endless, painful austerity. Therefore, such students of

Buddhism are condemned as non-Buddhist. [Tien-t'ais] Great Concentration

and Insight states that, although they study Buddhism, their views are no dif-

ferent from those of non-Buddhists,

Whether you chant the Buddhas name; recite the sutra, or merely offer

flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of

goodness in your life, With this conviction, you should strive in faith. (On

Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime, The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol, 1, pp. 3-4)

28

he character myo of myoho, or Mystic

Te has three meanings: to be fully

three meanings are all implicit in chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo. In other words, the chanting

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo contains (1) the myo

of perfect endowmentmeaning that the single

Law of Myoho-renge-kyo encompasses all phe-

nomena; (2) the myo of transformation that

opens the world of Buddhahood in the lives of

beings in the nine worlds (the worlds from hell

through bodhisattva); and (3) the myo of great

benefit, whereby a life filled with suffering is

revived as a life of great tranquillity and joy.

Our lives themselves are entities of the Mystic

Law. Therefore, they are fully endowed with all

of Buddhahoodall of these exist within us. For

and fundamental inner revolutionchanging

darkness into light; kindling the flame of enlight-

desires (The Record of the Orally Transmitted

Teachings, p. 11) and thereby manifesting the world

of Buddhahood in our lives of the nine worlds,

The key to achieving this profound inner

transformation is our heartsour fundamental

attitude or mind-set. Therefore, Nichiren Dai-

shonin warns in On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime: If you think the Law is outside

yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law

but an inferior teaching (WND-1, 3). When we

diligently exert ourselves in chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo based on this admonition,

always remembering that a change in our own

hearts or minds is crucial, the three meanings of

myo will clearly manifest themselves in our lives.

Needless to say, the Law contained in the prac-

tice of chanting spread by Nichiren is truly

wondrous. But even the power of this wondrous

Law cannot fully manifest in a life clouded by

ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that

staying focused on our own Buddha nature and

that of others. The practice of chanting enables us

to break through this darkness and vibrantly

bring forth our Buddhahood. Battling our funda-

mental darknessthis inner struggle is the

Studying Buddhism Yet Succumbing

to Non-Buddhist Thinking

In the passage we are studying this time, Nichiren

Daishonin strongly cautions: You must never

think that any of the eighty thousand sacred

teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha's lifetime or any

of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten direc-

tions and three existences are outside yourself

(WND-1, 3). The use of the word never here is

deeply significant. This passage explains that the

lives. Nichiren concludes that the eighty thou-

sand sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha's

lifetime and the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of

the ten directions and three existences are all

Nichiren goes on to say that as long as we seek

forming ten thousand practices and ten

thousand good deeds (meaning all of the prac-

tices expounded in Shakyamunis lifetime

teachings) and believing in the protection of the

Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the three

29

|



On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime |

the universe) will be in vain. Doing so js as point-

less as counting a neighbor's wealth, he Sat

because we personally gain nothing from doing =

Nichiren then cites a passage from a Tien-tal

school commentary, which states, Unless one per-

ceives the nature of ones life, one cannot eradicate

ones grave offenses (WND-1, 3-4). If we fail to

grasp this point, Nichiren warns, all of the practices

and good deeds we might perform while seeking

become an endless, painful austerity (WND-1, 4).

What does it mean to say that unless we per-

ceive the nature of our lives, we cannot eradicate

our grave offenses? Grave offenses here can be

taken to indicate fundamental darkness, which is

the source of all evil. The grave offense of slan-

derdenigrating the Law or the correct teaching

of Buddhismarises from fundamental darkness

or ignorance.

In Tien-Vais Buddhism, it is only possible to

mental darkness can be overcome by the sharp

substituting faith for wisdom.* This is the

To recap, if we seek enlightenment outside of

us, We are not pursuing the path of observing

ones mind, which enables us to overcome the

fundamental evil of ignorance or darkness. In

that case, all our efforts and good deeds to attain

they will be every bit as futile as counting a neigh-

bors vast riches. Moreover, because none of these

will only become an endless, painful austerity.

This battle against ignorance is the heart of

Buddhism. It is said that Shakyamunis enlighten-

ment lay in identifying darkness or ignorance as

30

the fundamental cause of the sufferings of birth,

aging, sickness and deathas well as in expound.

ing the way for overcoming this ignorance,

Therefore, as long as we seck the path to

from the true essence of Buddhism. Accordingly,

Nichiren says: Such students of Buddhism are

condemned as non-Buddhist (WND-1, 4).

To Seek Enlightenment Outside

Our Lives Is To Be Defeated by

Fundamental Darkness

An important point in this writing is that we as

Nichiren Buddhists also run the risk of falling

into non-Buddhist ways of thinking if we seek the

Law outside of our own lives. Hence, as Nichiren

Daishonins disciples, we must always bear in

mind his admonition You must never think that

any of the [Buddhas] teachings . . . are outside

yourself (WND-1, 3).

The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a

mystic truth that exists in all people and achiev-

ing Buddhahood in this lifetime. It is an

incomparably wonderful practice (OTT, 88), in

the sense that it represents the means by which all

living beings can gain enlightenment.

If, however, we forget Nichirens admonition to

never seek the Law outside of us, then no matter

how hard we practice, we will lose sight of the cor-

wind up practicing a non-Buddhist teaching. Thats

why Nichiren is so strict on this point.

The essence of our practice is to Perceive the

true nature of our lives. To do this we must wage

an inner struggle. If we allow ourselves to be

defeated by the three obstacles and four devils,*

we cannot bring forth our enlightenment. That js

f

 ll wl

bn On 0 8 on 5 5 Os Og Og gn oo OO

|

|

|

why battling the darkness or ignorance within us

is an unavoidable part of the process of becoming

a Buddha. In other words, whether we continu-

ously battle our innate ignorance is the single

most important determinant in whether we

attain Buddhahood. As such, it is something we

must never forget.

By engaging in this struggle, we can reveal the

Buddha wisdom within our lives and thereby

confront and overcome our ignorance. But if we

fail to undertake this struggle, ignorance will

shroud and conceal our Buddha nature. Igno-

inclinations of greed, anger, foolishness, arro-

gance and doubt within us. That is what happens

if we succumb to the erroneous view that the Law

is outside ourselves.

Faith for Attaining

Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Naturally, the Gohonzonthe object of devotion

in Nichiren Buddhismin itself is great beyond

measure. A passage from Nichikans Six-Volume

Writings that states: Even someone who has not

yet aroused true faith will still receive immense

benefit through connecting with the correct

object [of devotion, namely, the Gohonzon]

(Rokkansho, p. 81).

The true lineage of faith we inherit in the Soka

Gakkai is what opens up this infinite and bound-

less power of the Gohonzon. Faith as practiced by

the Soka Gakkai entails an active struggle to man-

ifest the Mystic Law in our lives; it also produces

clear actual proof of benefit. When we advance

together with the Soka Gakkai, we naturally come

to internalize the correct practice of faith as

taught by Nichiren Daishonin.

Therefore, those who sincerely chant Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo to the Gohonzon and practice

and participate in activities with the Soka Gakkai

cannot fail to become Buddhas. The purpose of

faith is to freely realize our full potential and shine

in our own unique way. Thats why its important

to keep advancing and challenging ourselves, to

have the spirit I will exert myself in my practice! I

will deepen my faith! I will do my best as a mem-

ber of the Soka Gakkai. This is the certain path to

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

With this understanding, lets concretely and

strictly apply to our daily practice Nichirens

admonition If you think the Law is outside your-

self, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an

inferior teaching (WND-1, 3). To seek the Mystic

Law somewhere outside of us essentially amounts

to evading responsibility for our own lives.

Practicing Nichiren Buddhism means not

being swayed this way and that; it means con-

structing a self that is solid and resolute like

towering Mount Fuji. But if we neglect this task

and focus our energies somewhere else, before

we're even aware of it, we can end up veering onto

the path of externally seeking the Law.

For example, if we chant to the Gohonzon but

always blame other people or our environment

for our circumstances, we are avoiding the chal-

lenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance.

By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment out-

side of us. By changing ourselves on a more

ation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the

driving force for that change.

It is also important that we dont fall into the

31

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

trap of practicing dependent faith, where we pin

our hopes on having our prayers answered

through the divine or transcendent powers of

gods or Buddhas. This is a typical example of

viewing the Law as outside oneself. The provi-

sional Buddhas of the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings

Even when they're obviously suffering, people

of dependent faith avoid looking at their prob-

lems. They don't have the courage or make any

actual effort to challenge their situation. In such

cases, quite frankly, faith is simply something peo-

Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly

To use the analogy of mountain cimbing, if we

just walk around the base of the mountain and

never actually attempt to ascend its slopes, we'll

never reach the summit, no matter how much time

can never strengthen and develop ourselves, and

we won't be able to attain Buddhahood in this

lifetime.

In addition, it is important that we try to rid

our lives of ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

lief as well as grumbling and complaining. The

tic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core

an inability to believe that all peopleourselves

and otherspossess the Buddha nature. And this

disbelief stems from fundamental darkness,

In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to

skeptically regard the Buddha nature as a nice

ideal but one that doesnt really change reality

vill manifest itself as prayer that is vague and

acking in conviction. If our efforts in faith are

alfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or

indamentally transform our lives.

As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he

 rc wlltii<C

says, You must summon up deep faith (WND.,

3), if we hope to make our inherent Buddha

nature the basis of our livesor as N ichiren

terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime

we must continue striving to deepen our faith,

our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-renge.

kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as

confident and concrete prayer.

Because our practice of faith is aimed at

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is essen.

tial that we have a solidly focused attitude when

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like trying

to shoot an arrow: without a clear target, we won't

draw the bow with any real force or determina-

tion. In the same way, when we replace vague

yearnings with concrete determinations and con-

fident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what

we hope to achieve.

Grumbling and complaining are the principal

gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find

ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of

ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual,

it will act as a constant brake on our growth and

Cause us to forget about advancing and improv-

ing ourselves. We will then effectively close off our

own potential, falling into the path of seeking the

Law outside of us. While it might be a real chal-

lenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can

derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control

these tendencies and use them as a springboard

for positive growth and development,

Let's also strictly guard against slandering our

fellow members, Slandering and harboring resent-

ment and jealousy toward others results in denying

their Buddha nature, The inability to believe in

others Buddha naturejust like not believing in

our owncalises US to stray off course and seek

the Law externally, Our Buddha nature is what

fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for

ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha

nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra,

which teaches that all people have the potential for

Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly

warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra,

not only won't we accomplish our desire to attain

Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up

committing slander of the Law."

Also, unless we practice together united in the

spirit of many in body, one in mind, the great

desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.

Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves

and others is the true means for attaining Bud-

dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the

The Spirit of the First Three Presidents

Pulses in the Soka Gakkai

A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of

the Law in each persons life is one that treasures

the individual. It calls out to each person, encour-

ages his or her individual human revolution and

seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the

appearance of one person after another embracing

faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily

the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.

This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first

three presidentsTsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei

Toda and myselfhave steadfastly followed.

That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phe-

nomenal development and why our kosen-rufu

movement has spread throughout the entire world.

In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the

Law as existing outside ones own life tend to be

authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and

uals or clerical authority, while their followers

dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak-

ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings

greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes

after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have

come to function almost exclusively as purveyors

of funeral and memorial services for the deceased,

devolving into what is known as funeral Bud-

dhism. They offer no philosophy that empowers

The Soka Gakkais founder, President

Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a

teaching for transforming ones life. To believe

that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo exists

within us is to have the confidence that we will

definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood

in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working

for kosen-rufu through sharing Nichiren Bud-

dhism based on the conviction that it holds the

key to happiness for both ourselves and others.

This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and

the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the

first three presidents spirit of the oneness of

mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this

most difficult of challengesthat of awakening

President Toda used to say, You should

Law is the highly effective medicine (The Lotus

Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 269)

that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also

33

uv

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

trap of practicing dependent faith where we pin

our hopes on having our prayers answered

through the divine or transcendent powers of

gods or Buddhas. This is a typical example of

viewing the Law as outside oneself. The provi-

sional Buddhas of the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings"

Even when they're obviously suffering, people

of dependent faith avoid looking at their prob-

lems. They dont have the courage or make any

actual effort to challenge their situation, In such

cases, quite frankly, faith is simply something peo-

Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly

Touse the analogy of mountain dimbing, if we

just walk around the base of the mountain and

never actually attempt to ascend its slopes, we'll

never reach the summit, no matter how much time

can never strengthen and develop ourselves, and

we won't be able to attain Buddhahood in this

lifeti

In addition, it is important that we try to rid

our lives of ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

lief as well as grumbling and complaining. The

tic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core

an inability to believe that all peopleourselves

and otherspossess the Buddha nature, And this

In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to

skeptically regard the Buddha nature as a nice

ideal but one that doesnt really change reality

will manifest itself as prayer that is vague and

lacking in conviction, If our efforts in faith are

halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or

fundamentally transform our lives,

As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he

32

says, You must summon up deep faith Se I,

3), if we hope to make our inherent Budd ha

nature the basis of our livesor as Nichiren

terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime

we must continue striving to deepen our faith,

our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as

confident and concrete prayer.

Because our practice of faith is aimed at

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is esse-

tial that we have a solidly focused attitude when

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like oe

to shoot an arrow: without a clear target, we wr :

draw the bow with any real force or determina-

tion. In the same way, when we replace vague

yearnings with concrete determinations and con-

fident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what

we hope to achieve. f

Grumbling and complaining are the principal

gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

lief Even if we know it is wrong, we may find

ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of

ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual,

it will act as a constant brake on our growth and

cause us to forget about advancing and improv-

ing ourselves. We will then effectively close off our

own potential, falling into the path of seeking the

Law outside of us. While it might be a real chal-

lenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can

derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control

these tendencies and use them as a springboard

for positive growth and development.

Let's also strictly guard against slandering our

fellow members, Slandering and harboring resent-

ment and jealousy toward others results in denying

their Buddha nature, The inability to believe in

others Buddha naturejust like not believing in

Our Owncauses us to stray off course and seek

the Law externally, Our Buddha nature is what

fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for

ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha

nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra,

which teaches that all people have the potential for

Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly

warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra,

not only wont we accomplish our desire to attain

Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up

committing slander of the Law."

Also, unless we practice together united in the

spirit of many in body, one in mind, the great

desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.

Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves

and others is the true means for attaining Bud-

dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the

The Spirit of the First Three Presidents

Pulses in the Soka Gakkai

A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of

the Law in each person's life is one that treasures

the individual. It calls out to each person, encour-

ages his or her individual human revolution and

seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the

appearance of one person after another embracing

faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily

the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu."

This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first

three presidentsTsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei

Toda and myselfhave steadfastly followed.

That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phe-

nomenal development and why our kosen-rufu

movement has spread throughout the entire world,

In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the

Law as existing outside ones own life tend to be

authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and

uals or clerical authority, while their followers

dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak-

ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings

greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes

after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have

come to function almost exclusively as purveyors

of funeral and memorial services for the deceased,

devolving into what is known as funeral Bud-

dhism. They offer no philosophy that empowers

The Soka Gakkais founder, President

Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a

teaching for transforming ones life. To believe

that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo exists

within us is to have the confidence that we will

definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood

in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working

for kosen-rufu through sharing Nichiren Bud-

dhism based on the conviction that it holds the

key to happiness for both ourselves and others.

This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and

the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the

first three presidents spirit of the oneness of

mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this

most difficult of challengesthat of awakening

President Toda used to say, You should

Law is the highly effective medicine (The Lotus

Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 269)

that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also

AeA 1 MMM A

33

the great treasure storehouse that brings good

fortune and happiness to all. The important thing

is to live out our lives based on and completely in

sync with the Law; it is to imbue and solidify our

lives with the Mystic Law.

Our daily realities are filled with an endless

succession of problems. But with the firm belief

that our lives are Myoho-renge-kyo, we should

strive to boldly challenge everything with the

unwavering conviction that we can overcome all

hardships and become happy without fail. When

We maintain deep faith based on the foundation

that I am Myoho-renge-kyo. we can take on any

lies in whether we can bring forth courage. Not a

shrinking timidity but a challenging courage

this is what we need to have!

Irrespective of the obstacles we may encounter

in the course of our practice, we must not Tetreat

a single step. We must not be alarmed or startled

by them. The power of the Mystic Law (Myoho-

tenge-kyo) can triumph over anything. To become

deeply confident of this is most important.

Fearing hardships and bemoaning and resent-

ing our environment are to believe that the Law is

outside our own lives. So is losing confidence in

Our ability to overcome our circumstances and

turning to others in the hope that they will save

us, or blaming others for our problems, or giving

in to hopelessness and resignation.

When difficulties beset us, no matter how try-

ing they may be, we must clearly see them for the

obstacles or devilish functions they are and battle

against them without retreating. This is the way

of life of those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

and dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law.

Nichiren Daishonin says, [My] disciples cannot

accomplish anything if they are cowardly (The

Teaching, Practice, and Proof WND-1, 481). In

34

; ds, let ide cowardice

accord with these words, lets cast asid

and make courage our foremost attribute. wth

People of courageous faith can break thro a

the dark clouds of fear, ignorance and ee

bring the sun of the Mystic Law to shine

of

beautiful flowers of Myoho-rengethe es

the Mystic Lawto bloom in their Lines e to

President Toda gave the following puidan AS

young womens division members in the p ee

ing days of our movement: You should ha of

the Latter Day. Win in life with a noble spirit.

must absolutely never depreciate your: selves: an

Nichiren Buddhism starts from the peat

that the supreme life-condition of oe

Possible for us to achieve the profoundest ae

transformationa transformation of our funda

mental attitude or mind-set. Thats why ee

what's in our hearts, ,

He writes: Whether you chant the Buddha

name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers 4

incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits

and roots of goodness in your life, With this conv!

tion you should strive in faith (WND-1, 4). All our

the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo each morning and evening, as well as all of our

Various Soka Gakkai activitiesare virtuous acts

that implant benefits and roots of goodness in

our lives. Those who advance with this deep aware-

oe a0 victors who travel the direct path

 : se in this lifetime,

did in eee the great philosophy

S words It is the heart that

tMportant (WND-1, 1000), let us lead magnif-

icent, victorious lives!

@

 Miao-lo, The Annotations on Great Concentration and Insight.

As used here, the Buddha's name denotes Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

Three meanings of myo: In The Daimoku of the Lotus Sutra,

Nichiren Daishonin writes: Myo means to be fully endowed,

which in turn has the meaning of perfect and full (WND-1, 146);

The character myo means to open (WND-1, 145); and Myo

means to revive, that is, to return to life (WND-1, 149).

Specifically, the ten directions are the eight directions of the com-

southwestplus up and down. Buddhist scriptures refer to the

verse, each with its own Buddha. The expression the Buddhas of the

ten directions in the sutras indicates these Buddhas. The phrase fen

directions often appears with the phrase three existences, meaning

tions and three existences thus means all Buddhas throughout

space and time.

cause for gaining supreme wisdom, and faith alone leads to

- Originally inherent mystic truth: The fundamental Law, Mystic

Law or Buddha nature with which all life is originally endowed.

appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith.

temple of the Nikko school (also known as the Fuji school). He is

clarify their true meaning, During the four centuries after Nichiren

Daishonins death, a number of errors and misconceptions had

arisen as his followers split into many schools. Nichikan worked

tirelessly to clarify the true meaning of Nichirens teachings. He

completed exegeses on Nichirens five major writings and other

works, and authored The Six- Volume Writings, which distinguishes

the correct interpretations of Nichirens teachings from misleading

ones.

10. The provisional teachings that preceded the Lotus Sutra do not

teach that the world of Buddhahood exists in all people, and

instead describe Buddhas as idealized and superior beings. The

Pure Land (Nembutsu) teachings, for example, explain that instead

of relying on ones own efforts, one should exclusively depend on

salvation through such a Buddhanamely, Amida.

11. In The Fourteen Slanders, Nichiren writes: There is a difference

if one chants the daimoku while acting against the intent of this

sutra ... Always remember that believers in the Lotus Sutra should

absolutely be the last to abuse one another. All those who keep faith

in the Lotus Sutra are most certainly Buddhas, and one who slan-

ders a Buddha commits a grave offense (WND-1, 756).

12. In The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life. Nichiren writes: all

disciples and lay supporters of Nichiren should chant Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but one in mind,

transcending all differences among themselves to become as insep-

arable as fish and the water in which they swim. This spiritual

bond is the basis for the universal transmission of the ultimate Law

of life and death. Herein lies the true goal of Nichirens propaga-

tion. When you are so united, even the great desire for widespread

13. In The True Aspect of All Phenomena, Nichiren writes: At first

only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two,

three, and a hundred followed, chanting and teaching others. Prop-

agation will unfold this way in the future as well. Does this not

signify emerging from the earth? (WND-1, 385).

DN

35

RITA AR MR

of.

Ts MOLE

EE RR TEC EK

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Key Points:

The Essence of Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

The Law contained in the practice of chanting

spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. But even the

Power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest

in a life douded by ignorance. Ignorance is the

inner darkness that prevents us from believing in

the Mystic Law and staying focused on our own

Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of

chanting enables us to break through this darkness

and vibrantly bring forth our Buddhahood. Bat-

tling our fundamental darknessthis inner

struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myoho-

Tenge-kyo. (p. 29)

The Heart of Buddhism

If we seek enlightenment outside of US, We are not

Pursuing the path of observing ones mind

which enables us to overcome the fundamental evil

of ignorance or darkness. In that case, all our

be lacking the vital ingredient; they will be every

bit as futile as counting a neighbor's vast riches,

Moreover, because none of these efforts will help

us eradicate our ignorance, they will only become

an endless, painful austerity. This battle against

ignorance is the heart of Buddhism. (p. 30)

The Driving Force for

Our Transformation

If we chant to the Gohonzon but always blame

other people or our environment for our circum-

stances, we are avoiding the challenge of tackling

our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we

are seeking enlightenment outside of us, By chang-

ing ourselves on a more profound level that we

can begin to improve our situation, Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that

change. (p, 31)

36

____On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Confident and Concrete Prayer

The erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the

Mystic Law) exists outside of our lives has at Its

core an inability to believe that all peopleoul

selves and otherspossess the Buddha nature.

And this disbelief stems from fundamental dark-

ness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency t

skeptically regard the Buddha nature as a nice

ideal but one that doesnt really change reality wall

manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking in

conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted,

we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally

transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this

writing when he says, You must summon up deeP

faith (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inher-

Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this

lifetimewe must continue striving to deepen our

faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-

tenge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will

manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43 )

Overcoming Grumbling

and Complaining

Grumbling and complaining are the principal

Bateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find

ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of

ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual,

it will act as a constant brake on our growth and

Cause us to forget about advancing and improving

ourselves. We will then effectively close off our own

Outside of us, While it might be a real challenge to

Stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive

from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these

tendencies and use them as a springboard for pos-

itive growth and development. (p. 32)

>, wa

STE LE IL IO AL

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

With a Brave and Vigorous Spirit

Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge

> > 4

The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas emancipation

| in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities

of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It

also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands,

our minds.

It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is

called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This

is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A

mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar-

nished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror,

true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day

and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo. (On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime, The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

37

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

With a Brave and Vigorous Spirit

Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge

@

The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas emancipation

in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities

of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It

also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands,

Pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of

our minds.

It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is

called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This

is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A

mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar-

nished mirror, but when polished, it is sure t0 become like a clear mirror,

true aspect of reality, Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day

and night, How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo, (on Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime, ! he Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

  Cae

a5 Oo

37

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Ment to truth and justice never lose

hope, even amid the greatest hardship or

difficulty. Rather, they serve as a bright beacon

illuminating the darkness of peoples suffering,

imparting inspiration, assurance and

When we change, the world changes. The

key to all change is in our inner transforma-

tiona change in our hearts and minds, This is

human revolution, We all have the power to

change. When we realize this truth of life, we

Can bring forth that power anywhere, anytime

and in any situation,

Nichiren Buddhism, based on the transfor-

Tative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has made

this great path of inner change available to

all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho-

Tenge-kyo as its core Practice.

This time, Ill discuss the passage in which

Nichiren Daishonin outlines the basic attitude

and approach to our fundamental Pfactice of

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

Changing Ourselves

and Changing the Land

As I have already touched on at length, the

lives. And the key to attaining Buddhahoodthe

ultimate transformation of our life-statealso

lies in a change in our hearts, or minds,

To convey this point, Nichiren Daishonin

here summarizes a point from the Vimalakirti

Sutra:' When one seeks the Buddhas emanci-

38

Way f

  Sn NY

 ~ wn ~  Cae wall Cae Cae Cane Care wary

finds that ordinary beings are the cae

and death are nirvana (WND- 1, 4). eae

Ordinary beings are the entities 

Buddhahood (enlightenment) m sate

lives of ordinary people steeped sae a

desires. Similarly, the sufferings  Laat

death are nirvana means that ee cicnss)

state of true peace and tranquillity eee

manifests in the lives of ordinary ie

mented by the sufferings of birth ce; qi

Here, Nichiren explains that Bud oe

ordinary people are not separated by 2

mountable divide; that the only thing as

them apart is the difference in the 

; ee it cites the passage naa

Vimalakirti Sutra that explains the di : a

between pure and impure lands. This pass : a

which Nichiren summarizes as If the min ee

living beings are impure, their land is a

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is

land*clarifies that there are not two separa ;

lands; the only difference between pure . :

impure lands is the good or evil of our minds.

The view shown here is one in which the pure

land does not exist in some otherworldly realm

but in the real world, and is achieved by people

changing themselves inside, This is a dynamic

and practical view of the pure land, based on

the idea of to purify Buddha lands expounded

in the Lotus Sutra (The Lotus Sutra and Its

Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 117).

The Vimalakirti Sutra passage cited by Nichi-

om for attaining

anifests in the

tting

a chapter. This chapter describes the

Budahie on Vimalakirti, an outstanding

s.. : mee who has fallen ill, and Manju-

nie eel leading disciples, who

es 4 im. When asked the cause of his

tie eet replies, Because all living

wee bodhisattva spirit of taking on

= sufferings as ones own.

sr ce  born among living beings afflicted

oo A sua to share in the sufferings of

_ teehee beings to enlightenment. More-

ae seattvas are never overwhelmed or

Tistiea  Y suffering, because they have estab-

This oh, State of enlightenment within.

Sis A : e passages from the Vimalakirti

nah: a odhisattva practitioner fighting

fie tetas realities of daily life. Nichiren, there-

an ordinary being, but when enlight-

r words, the difference between ordinary

People and Buddhas is nothing more than the

difference between delusion and enlightenment

M ordinary peoples minds. How, then, can we

transform delusion into enlightenment?

In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains

that when peoples hearts change, the land or

their external environment can also change. At

its foundation is a transformation from delu-

sion to enlightenment.

As discussed earlier, what makes this trans-

formation possible is the practice of chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual

level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can

overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the

with which we are originally endowed.

Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe

this fundamental potential for change, saying,

This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will

shine like a jewel when polished (WND-1, 4).

In this way, he conveys that the practice of

chanting Nam-myoho- renge-kyothe means

for defeating our inner darknesssertves to

polish our lives.

All living beings are inherently entiti

Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud-

dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of

the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin-

drance, whenever and in whatever form it is

needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life

to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even

though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we

cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our

lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such 3

benighted state, we are like a tarnished mirror

that will not reflect anything. Chanting eid

myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing

the tarnished mirror of our lives.

The Path for Polishing Our Lives:

(1) Brave Challenge

Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chant-

ing as a practice for polishing our lives: a mind

now clouded by the illusions of the innate dark-

ness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but i

{ie., the Dharma nature] and the

true aspect of

39

your mirror day and night. How should you

kyo (WND-1, 4).

The mirror simile here is truly ingenious.

The mirror being endowed with the property

of reflection corresponds to our lives being

not polished, it will naturally become clouded.

Since mirrors in Nichirens day were typically

made of bronze, they would readily tarnish. A

tarnished mirror could not fulfill its original

function, so it had to be polished regularly.

Similarly, if our lives are neglected and left

uncultivated, they will be shrouded in ignorance.

The act of polishing is indispensable for

over, just polishing a mirror once is not

it to retain its reflective property. As this

metaphor aptly attests, our practice of chanting

40

: explains that bravely and vigorously (yumyo)

SGI President Ikeda

welcomes U.N.

Under-Secretary-General

Anwarul K. Chowdhury at

the Makiguchi Memorial Hall

in Tokyo, August 30, 2006.

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to polish

our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of

ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our

This practice of polishing our lives may be

seen as having two aspects. One is to arouse

deep faith, as Nichiren exhorts (WND-1, 4).

This could also be articulated as summoning

the fighting spirit to battle our inner darkness.

The other aspect is to continue making stead-

fast efforts, in accord with Nichirens

admonition that we should diligently polish

our mirror day and night (see WND-1, 4).

These two points echo the two aspects of

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo identified

by Nichikan, a seventeenth-century restorer of

Nichiren Buddhism, based on the phrase in

the Expedient Means chapter of the Lotus

Sutra, exert oneself bravely and vigorously

(see LSOC, 56; Jpn yumyo shojin). Nichikan

courageously bringing forth the power

means r confidence; in chanting Nam-myoho-

of faith,  while exert oneself (shojin) means

Sin  sincerely and consistently in the

Oe ae of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

grat important thing is having the challeng-

: irit to act with courage. This could be

ao arousing deep faith from the

described as ; . 2

ost reaches of our lives in accord with

summon forth the mystic truth within us,

manifest our inherent Buddhahood and

attain enlightenment in this lifetime without

fail. It also means directly taking on the three

obstacles and four devils that seek to obstruct

us from chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. We

need to have a fearless, tireless and unremit-

ting challenging spirit to confront and

overcome the diverse array of obstacles that

lenging, battling and defeating ignorance that

we can polish our lives.

jnnerm

Nichirens wo

The Path for Polishing Our Lives:

(2) Continuing

Next, continuing is vital. It is absolutely essential

for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Nichiren Daishonin says: To accept is easy; to

continue is difficult. But Buddhahood lies in

continuing faith (The Difficulty of Sustaining

Faith, WND-1, 471), In On Attaining Buddha-

hood in This Lifetime? we see the paramount

importance of continuing from Nichirens

an night and diligently (WND-1, 4). Main-

aining an unflagging practice of chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a crucial requirement

for attaining Buddhahood.

Nichiren writes: Suffer what there is to suf-

fer, enjoy what there is to enjoy. Regard both

suffering and joy as facts of life, and continue

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, no matter

what happens. How could this be anything other

than the boundless joy of the Law? (Happiness

in This World, WND-1, 681). We must continue

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo during times

of both suffering and joy. The emphasis here is

on the word continue, and it is key that we do so

throughout both suffering and joy. When con-

fronted with suffering, we must not retreat. We

should suffer what there is to suffer. This is nei-

ther resignation nor escapism. We need to fix

our gaze unflinchingly on reality and bravely

challenge it based on chanting Nam-myoho-

correct attitude for practitioners of the Mystic

Law. Faith in Nichiren Buddhism is constantly

directed toward transforming reality.

Of course, such a state of life is not gained

overnight. But if we steadfastly and diligently

continue making efforts to polish ourselves day

in and day out, month after month, year after

year, we will naturally and surely come to attain

it, mirroring the words of the sutra passage

This cluster of unsurpassed jewels / has come

to us unsought (LSOC, 124).

Next, enjoy what there is to enjoy (WND-1,

681), can be taken to mean that when we're expe-

gratitude and make even greater efforts to chant

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, aiming toward the ulti-

mate goal of attaining Buddhahood in this

lifetime. Deepening our seeking spirit in faith is

much more difficult in good times than in bad,

because in good times it is easy to grow lax and

41

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

self-satisfied. Rather than being someone who is

strong in adversity but weak when things are

going well, we should seck to construct the kind

of invincible faith that allows us to regard both

suffering and joy as facts of life (WND-1, 681).

Such strong faith is forged through our prac-

tice as Soka Gakkai members striving to achieve

the lofty goal of kosen-rufu and our own enlight-

Nam-myoho-renge-kyothe process by which

we diligently polish our mirror day and night

(see WND-1, 4)strengthens our lives in the

same way that a magnificent sword is forged and

tempered. The crux here lies in chanting with the

spirit to challenge in times of suffering, and

chanting with appreciation in times of joy.

Continuing? is another way of saying not

Tegressing. Throughout the pages of Nichirens

writings, we can see his emphasis on never

Tegressing or backsliding in faith. To cite but a

few passages, Nichiren writes: One . . . who

chants the daimoku, is the Thus Come Ones

great persecutions and embraces the sutra from

beginning to end is the Thus Come Ones emis-

sary (The Farther the Source, the Longer the

Stream, WND-1, 942); Strengthen your faith

day by day and month after month. Should you

slacken in your resolve even a bit, devils will

take advantage (On Persecution Befalling the

Sage, WND-1, 997); and Carry through with

your faith in the Lotus Sutra. You cannot strike

fire from flint if you stop halfway (Earthly

Desires Are Enlightenment, WND-1, 319).

Without a battle to conquer ignorance or

darkness, we cannot manifest the essential

nature of phenomena, or Dharma nature, And

unless we continue to wage this battle through

42

an unshakable state of life that is one with the

Dharma nature (namely, the life-state of Bud-

dhahood). This is because if we slacken in our

negative influences.

Also, when we exert ourselves in faith, the

three obstacles and four devils inevitably arise.

It is by defeating them that we can establish the

life-state of Buddhahood. When we polish our

lives on the most fundamental level through

the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo, we can deepen, strengthen and broaden

ourselves spiritually without limit.

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

Is a Diligent Practice

Nichiren Daishonin strove to share the supreme

inner state of attaining Buddhahood in this

lifetime with all his followersand indeed all

humankind.

The true greatness of the practice of chant-

ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it enables

life-state as the Buddha and lead an existence

of unsurpassed depth and meaning. This is

clearly indicated in the following well-known

ted Teachings: If in a single moment of life we

kalpas, then instant after instant there will arise

in us the three Buddha bodies? with which we

are eternally endowed, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

is just such a diligent practice (p, 214),

Ever since our second Soka Gakkai Presj-

dent, Josei Toda, explained this Passage to me

in my youth, I have made it the Persona]

motto by which I have lived my life. In all my

struggles, I have borne these words ever in mind.

The Emerging from the Earth chapter

of Ene Lotus Sutra describes countless

bodhisattvas appearing from out of the

groundthe emergence of the Bodhisattvas of

the Earth. It explains that they have been

dwelling in the empty space underneath the

saha world and seeking the Buddha way with

Constant diligence (see LSOC, 259). The above

Ber from The Record of the Orally Transmit-

= Raresgs clarifies from the standpoint of

cniren Buddhism the nature of their dili-

8ence or tireless exertion.

Pe Seine of Nichiren Buddhism is that

wea a exert themselves assiduously to seek

nee a way automatically manifest the

foe e of the Buddha eternally endowed with

ae a bodiesin other words, they bring

ir inherent Buddhahood.

a phen we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as if

ncentrate in a single moment the arduous

_ and trials of millions of kalpas (see OTT,

; 4)then the life-state of the Buddha eternal-

Y endowed with the three bodies (namely, our

Buddhahood) appears within us instant after

instant.

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice.

Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing

to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires

constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering

single-mindedly and consistently in this practice

will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this

lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent

Buddhahoodthe Buddha eternally endowed

with the three bodieswells forth in the form

of inexhaustible courage, perseverance, joy,

wisdom and compassion.

Praying for Brave and

Vigorous Youth To Appear

Exerting oneself means doing so bravely and

vigorously. Without courage and vigor, there is

no true exertion. The first Soka Gakkai presi-

dent, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, also led a life of

brave and vigorous endeavor. He once said to

young people: Exert yourselves bravely and

vigorously! Buddhism means taking action; it

means constantly striving. Even at my age,

thats what Im doing.

President Toda also remarked to youth,

Youth who wish for the happiness of humanity

should first themselves seek the essence of this

lofty philosophy of human revolution. They

should exert themselves bravely and vigorously

to fight and triumph over all manifestations of

the three powerful enemies and the three

obstacles and four devils.

My sentiments are exactly the same. I chant

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ardently for brave and

vigorous disciples, brave and vigorous youth, to

appear throughout the world. | am wholeheart-

bravely and vigorously is truly the hallmark of

the Soka Gakkais mentor-disciple spirit.

The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

the driving force for victory. Every challenge

should begin with chanting Nam-myoho-

steadfastly chant.

Diligently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

morning and evening, let us thoroughly polish

ourselves inside and construct lives in which we

win victory after victory.

8

43

1. Vimalakirti Sutra: A Mahayana sutra about Vimalakirti, a wealthy and

the sutra, Vimalakirti represents the ideal Mahayana lay believer, The

Sanskrit original of this sutra is not extant, but there are three Chinese

translations, including one by Kumaraiiva, which is the most popular

version and the work usually referred to when this title is mentioned.

2. Here, Nichiren Daishonin summarizes passages from the Vimalakirti

Sutra and the Great Teacher Tien-tais reference to it. Inquiring

About the Illness, the fifth chapter of the sutra, contains the following

asked Manjushri. It may be sought in the minds . . . of all living

beings replied Vimalakirti The Vimalakirti Sutra, trans. by Burton

University Press, 1997), p. 66.

In his Great Concentration and Insight, Tien-t'ai writes: According

to the Vimalakirti Sutra, the emancipation of the Thus Come One

should be sought in the minds of living beings. Because living beings

are entities of enlightenment, it is not something to be obtained.

Because |the birth and death of] living beings are nirvana, [birth and

death] are not extinguished. Emancipation already exists in the heart

of one and the hearts of all, as do all phenomena

3. This summary is based on the passage, When the mind is pure, the

Buddha land will be pure The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 29.

4. Vimalakirti says: Because all living beings are sick, therefore 1 am sick.

If all living beings are relieved of sickness, then my sickness will be

mended. Why? Because the bodhisattva for the sake of living beings

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifet

SGI President Ikedas

Lecture Series

ime

dirth and death he suffers illness, If living beings can Bain ay real

illness, then the bodhisattva will no longer be ill The y i

Sutra, p. 85.

5, The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 051.

& In Interpreting the Text Based upon Its Essential Meanir

The Six-Volume Writings, Nichikan writes: You should

to exert oneself bravely and vigorously (see LSOC, 56;

jin) refers to faith and to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, It theref

means the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo of the essential techie

Bravely and vigorously (yumyo) refers to faith, A commentary [on e

Lotus Sutra] therefore states: Yu (bravely) means to act with coura :

myo (vigorously) means to expend all ones wisdom? Hence, Nene

and vigorously describes courageously bringing forth the Power of ais,

to the fullest extent. Shojin (to exert oneself) indicates the Practice of

chanting daimoku. A commentary therefore states: Sho (pure) means

unadulterated; jin (effort) means ceaseless advance.

7. These words are an exclamation of joy when Shakyamunis voice.

hearer disciples learn that they can in fact attain Buddhahood, which

had previously been denied to them.

8. The three bodies of the Buddha refer to the Dharma body, the reward

body and the manifested body. The Dharma body is the fundamental

truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is

the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the com-

 of

* from

MMalakiry

NBs" A treatise of

Understand that

Jpn YUMYO sho.

the Ultimate Law of Life. Nichiren states: Shakyamuni

ined enlightenment countless kalpas ago, the Lotus Sutra

to Buddhahood, and we ordinary human beings are in

to inherit the ultimate Law of life and death.

ing From the Writings:

Teachings of Nichiren Daishonin

dent Ikeda on 15 writings from Nichiren

Always Turns to Spring, The Dragon Gate, The

nd Lessening One's Karmic Retribution. President

to this lecture series: The writings of Nichiren

ophy of hope as well as its practice and

ition that endlessly encourages and inspires

that Is, to put into practiceeven a line

ch overflow with his spirit.

ty bo.

osop

SGI-USA bookstore or from:

tore.sgi-usa.org

a a ae a

Key Points

When We Change, the World Changes

1a an in our inner transformationa

Fevolition i hearts and minds. This is human

a e all have the power to change.

ih ia realize this truth of life, we can bring

situation oe anywhere, anytime and in any

Bier ee odnises, based on the

made ae Ive Principles of the Lotus Sutra, has

i great path of inner change available to

Pie, with the chanting of Nam-myoho-

Tenge- i

Be-kyo as its core practice. (p. 38)

Th Changing the Environment

me ough Changing Peoples Hearts

Nichiren ex

change, plains that when peoples hearts

ion a eae At its foundation is a transforma-

vc peesen to enlightenment. What makes

chantin ee possible is the practice of

tual ah ee one sense kyo and, on a spiri-

Seton: aith, Simply put, through faith we can

; delusion and manifest the Buddhahood

w :

ith which we are originally endowed. (p. 39)

Polishing Our Lives Through

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

ve living beings are inherently entities of the

Ystic Law, And inherently, the life-state of Bud-

ahood enables us to tap the limitless power of

 Mystic Law within us freely and without hin-

Tance, whenever and in whatever form it is

Needed, Nichiren likens this supreme state of life

to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even

though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we

cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our

lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a

benighted state, we are like a tarnished mirror

that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the

tarnished mirror of our lives. (p. 39)

Arousing Deep Faith

and Making Continual Efforts

The act of polishing is indispensable for restoring

the mirrors innate property. Moreover, just polish-

ing a mirror once is not enough. We have to keep

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to

ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our

ishing our lives may be seen as having two aspects.

One is to arouse deep faith, as Nichiren exhorts

(WND-1, 4). This could also be articulated as sum-

moning the fighting spirit to battle our inner

darkness. The other aspect is to continue making

steadfast efforts, in accord with Nichirens admoni-

tion that we should diligently polish our mirror

day and night (see WND-1, 4). (p. 40)

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

Is a Diligent Practice

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice.

Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing

to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires

constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering

single-mindedly and consistently in this practice

will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Through such efforts, our inherent Buddha-

hoodthe Buddha eternally endowed with the

three bodieswells forth in the form of inex-

haustible courage, perseverance, joy, wisdom and

compassion. (p. 43)

45

Buddhahkood

The Mystic Nature of Our Lives

Become the Master of Your Mind

Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You

~~  orn are ane Sale ak eo "4 Oy Og Oo se

What then does myo signify? It is simply the mysterious nature of our life from

moment to moment, which the mind cannot comprehend or words express.

When we look into our own mind at any momen

it, We perceive neither color

nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot Say it does not exist, for

's continually occur. The mind cannot be considered

Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcends

$ of existence and nonexistence, It is neither exis-

bits the qualities of both. It is the mystic entity

imate reality. Myo is the name given to the

its manifestations [the manifestations of the

is used to symbolize the

a, | is the heart that is important (The

Strategy of the Lotus Sutra WND-1, 1000),

: writes Nichiren Daishonin. Our hearts, our

minds, are truly wondrous and unfathomable. We

Like the elation of soaring freely through the

vast blue heavens, the heart can feel immense and

a joy. Like the clear, bright sunshine

a  all things, the heart can embrace

ia ae and compassion those who are suf-

" Be dlike a lion of justice, the heart can also

oa tremble with righteous anger and defeat

he -  our hearts or minds are constantly

2 Sing, like scenes in a drama or like an unfold-

a ie nothing is more wondrous

a, a hearts ability to manifest the world of

Bisic od. Even people weighed down by

F n and suffering can bring forth in the

a = their lives the state of Buddhahood that

fe ne with the universe. This momentous drama

transformation is the greatest of all wonders.

Buddhism finds supreme nobility and the

Eorentiak for great change in all human beings.

InOn Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.

Nichiren, therefore, concludes that when we

thoroughly polish our lives through chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, it is possible for us to

tap the life-state of Buddhahood no matter

how steeped in delusion we may be, and to

transform even the most impure and evil land

into a pure land.

- Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the mystic

truth that is originally inherent in all living

beings (WND-1, 3), Accordingly, through the

can reveal our inner Buddhahoodpolishing the

tarnished mirror of a mind now clouded by the

illusions of the innate darkness of life into a clear

mirror reflecting the essential nature of phenom-

In other words, by manifesting the mystic truth

that resides within us, we can tap our infinite

inner potential. Buddhahood is the state of life

that is one with Myoho-renge-kyo, the originally

inherent mystic truth. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is

also the name of this ultimate state of life.

The passage I will discuss this time explains

the relation between Myoho-renge-kyo and the

mind of living beings in terms of the elements of

myo, ho, renge and kyo. This explanation may be

seen as a description of how our lives become

one with Myoho-renge-kyo and manifest the

state of Buddhahood. Let us consider the pro-

found meaning of this passage.

The Mind Is the Mystic Entity of the

Middle Way That Is the Ultimate Reality

Nichiren Daishonin says that myo of Myoho-

lives from moment to moment. And he uses the

concepts of existence and nonexistence to describe

this wondrous and unfathomable nature.

Our minds are in a state of constant flux,

moving with the ebb and flow of countless

thoughts and emotions. Nichiren notes: When

we look into our own mind at any moment, we

many differing thoughts continually occur. The

mind cannot be considered either to exist or not

to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that tran-

scends both the words and concepts of existence

and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor

nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both

(WND-1, 4).

47

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Nichiren describes this unfathomable

nature of the mind as the mystic entity of the

Middle Way that is the ultimate reality (WND-

1, 4). The Middle Way does not simply mean

the middle course between two extremes; it

by neither extreme but also embraces them

both. Shakyamuni set forth a sound philosophy

and practice transcending the two then-pre-

vailing extremes of hedonism and asceticism,

and he called this the Middle Way. In On

Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime, Nich-

iren says that the ultimate truth, which

transcends the two extremes of existence and

nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the

Middle Way, and because this is the Pinnacle of

truth, he calls it the ultimate Teality.

Transcending existence and nonexistence can

be taken to mean transcending impermanent

the qualities of both existence and nonexistence

while transcending both does not refer to a tran-

scendent or absolute being divorced from

impermanent phenomena, but indicates the truly

impermanent phenomena.

Although Nichiren explains the mysterious

nature of life or mind in terms of the concepts

of existence and nonexistence in this writing,

what he says here is comparable to Nagarjunas

concept of nonsubstantiality,' and to Tien-

Vais concepts of the unification of the three

truths and the threefold contemplation in a

single mind. Essentially, the mystic entity of

the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality of

which Nichiren speaks refers to our lives or

minds that are one with the ultimate trutha

concept expressed variously as nonsubstantial-

ity, the unification of the three truths, or

threefold contemplation in a single mind,

48

Renge Refers to the Principle of the

Simultaneity of Cause and Effect

Nichiren Daishonin next states that ho, meaning

Law or phenomena, is the name given to the

manifestations of the mystic nature of our lives or

mindsa term that can also be expressed as the

wondrous mind or the mind of myo. The mind

of myo is itself the Mystic Law. Abstract words

and theories alonebe they the concepts of

nonsubstantiality or the unification of the three

truthscannot be called the Mystic Law. For only

when the Mystic Law is expressed as the highest

human wisdom based on the Middle Way can it

spread as a guide and compass, and as a teaching

or Law (ho) for people to follow.

In addition, Nichiren says: Renge, which

means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the won-

der of this Law (WND-1, 4). The Mystic Law is

Not visible to the human eye. Therefore, the Bud-

dha uses a concrete symbol in order to help

tic nature. This is renge, meaning lotus flower.

Why does he employ the lotus flower? Usually

ship that is used to illustrate linear or sequential

Causality, with the flowers representing the cause

and the fruit the effect. In Buddhism, this is

Petals and its receptacle (which contains its fruit)

simultaneouslyin other words, its fruit is pro-

duced at the same time its petals open. The lotus

thus symbolizes the princi

of cause and effect,

The provisional teachings other than the Lotus

Sutra do not teach that Buddhahood is inherent

within the lives of ordinary people,

tegarded as the cause for attaining enlightenment.

Rather, they teach that one can only gain the state

of Buddhahood after undergoing countless eons of

which is

ne practice. Here, cause and effect are non-

a The teachings of the Lotus Sutra,

Midowea mi, that all people are originally

aa. ie iW the state of Buddhahood and can

ices _ epee In other words, the

lioinea: of an ordinary person is instantly

Pe Rtenin into the mind of myo (the supreme

Symbolizes eo a Buddha. The lotus flower

1s simultaneity of cause and effect.

Maintaini

hg the Mind of Myo

Is the Mystic Kyo Os

Nichir, : y

n Daishonin explains that kyo, meaning

Sutra

ie Be of Myoho-renge-kyo also refers to realiz-

a nel latte of life. He says: If we

an iS ian: our life at this moment is myo,

Bio met tein cs, understand that our life at other

mystic kyo Mystic Law. This realization is the

ie Y Or sutra (WND-1, 4).

fabric, ahaa thread, or warp, in a loom or

Gai, i Is also used to refer to the passage of

Oa iias 1s respect, Nichiren speaks of our lives

Rei c - abpan Our lives or minds are con-

ie anging, but when we defeat our inner

Be ica or ignorance, through strong faith

Fenge-Igy through our chanting Nam-myoho-

tiSland i the innate mystic truth appears within

ad i t he life of Myoho-rengeliterally, lotus of

'ystic Lawblooms within our hearts.

4 Day by day, through consistently chanting

am-myoho-renge-kyo, we can accumulate the

Causes and effects for attaining Buddhahood that

make it possible to transform a mind clouded by

the innate darkness of life into a mind reflecting

the essential nature of phenomena and the true

aspect of reality (see WND-1, 4). The virtues of

these causes and effects over time become the

bone and marrow of our beings, with flowers of

benefit blossoming in our characters and in our

lives. This is the mystic kyo in terms of our indi-

vidual lives.

Also, we can regard this mystic kyo as the

spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to

others. When the mind at this moment is

understood to mean the Buddhas mind and the

mind at other moments is taken to mean the

minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the

Buddhas teachings that expound aspects of his

life, or the mind of myo. And the king of sutras

that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is

the Lotus Sutra, the essence of which is Myoho-

kosen-rufu, with people propagating the Mystic

Law and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

unstintingly for their own happiness and that of

others and teaching others to do the same, could

be said to correspond to the mystic kyo.

As seen in the aforementioned discussion,

Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent in our own

lives. The ongoing moment-to-moment transfor-

mation in our hearts and minds that we achieve

through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo not

only leads to a fundamental inner change but to a

change in the entire way we live our lives, putting

us on track to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

And it further creates a groundswell for the great

transformation of all humankind that is kosen-

Myoho-renge-kyo.

Becoming the Masters of Our Minds

Since Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent within

- our lives, there is another topic I must touch on.

Namely, the relation between the mind of delu-

sion clouded by innate darkness and the mind

49

of myo illuminated by the essential nature of phe-

nomena and the true aspect of reality.

If we follow the deluded minds of ordinary

swayedour inner potential can rapidly wither

OF, even worse, we may succumb to negative and

destructive impulses. This is a problem stemming

from the subtlety of the mind. Because our minds

are the key to attaining Buddhahood in this

lifetime, we must overcome our own inner weak-

nesses. This is what our Buddhist practice is all

about. The deluded minds of ordinary people are

constantly wavering. We must not make such

wavering minds our basis or guide.

Nichiren Daishonin emphasizes this by citing

the well-known passage Become the master of

your mind rather than let your mind master you

(Letter to the Brothers, WND-1, 502). This pas-

to the effect: Our minds may suddenly run out of

control. Therefore, we must tame them like a wild

masters, but rather seeking to master our minds.4

The Nirvana Sutra contains a similar Passage,

May I be the master of my mind and not let my

mind become my master! (Letter to Renjo,

WND-2, 5). Nichiren cites this admonition many

times, making it a guideline for his followers,

Becoming the master of ones mind means

having a sound compass in life and the bright

beacon of faith. We must not be mastered by ordi-

nary people's inconstant, weak and ever-changing

minds of delusion. To master our minds, we must

guide them in the right direction. In that sense,

the true master of the mind is the Law and the

teachings of the Buddha. Shakyamuni vowed to

make the Law to which he had become enlight-

50

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

6 oa?

[ONO ES IS EAS ee ae :

living true to that vow. This is the way of life of

taking refuge in the Law that Shakyamuni

before he died.

The priests of the various Buddhist schools

during Nichirens lifetime had forgotten this

spirit of Shakyamuni. Following their own arbi-

trary minds or thinking, they lost sight of the

Buddhas teachings, denigrated the Lotus Sutra

and succumbed to arrogance. By contrast, Nichi-

Ten taught that the true master of the mind is

Myoho-renge-kyothe heart of the Lotus Sutra

and the fundamental Law of all Buddhasand

set forth the concrete Practice of chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo for Mastering ones mind. Also,

he frequently stressed to his followers the impor-

tant spirit of faith to seek this true master of the

mindthe Mystic Law.

For example, when, on account of his faith, the

their father, Nichiren ncouraged the two brothers,

saying that this was Precisely the time for them,

based on faith, to unite and Overcome the situa-

tion. He offers them this Suidance: A passage in

the Six Paramitas Sutra says to become the master

of your mind rather than let your mind master

you. Whatever trouble Occurs, regard it as no more

than a dream, and think only of the Lotus Sutra

(Letter to the Brothers, WND-1, 502),

The Path of Mentor and Disciple

Based on the Law

a the story of the Ikegami brothers tri-

a me we also learn the faith of the oneness

io themselves exactly as Nichiren Dai-

ie fon they could overcome their

~<4% discern the scheming of Ryokan, chief

10Ns; and in the end win the dramatic victory

of their father taking faith.

Eee allow ourselves to be mastered by our

ile Is to lead a self-centered existence. Ulti-

ne tly. wavering minds, succumb to egoism

 sink into the depths of darkness or igno-

ance. Conversely, to become the master of our

Minds is to live based on the Law.

A teacher or mentor in Buddhism is one who

leads and connects people to the Lawteaching

them that the Law on which they should depend

already exists within their own lives. The disciples

unturn seek the mentor, who embodies and is one

with the Law. Looking to the mentor as a model,

they exert themselves in their Buddhist practice.

In this way, they lead lives in which they become

Masters of their minds.

In other words, the existence of a mentor

one who embodies and lives in complete accord

with the Law, and who teaches people about the

vast inner potential they possessis indispen-

sable for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

I had a mentor who practiced as the Buddha

taughtour second Soka Gakkai president,

Josei Toda, who dedicated his life to widely

ageand that has made me who I am today.

President Toda is always with me as my spiritual

mentor, Even now, day after day, and moment

by moment, I am carrying on a dialogue with

my mentor in my heart. This is the spirit of the

oneness of mentor and disciple. Those who

hold fast to their spiritual mentor as their com-

teaches are people who live based on the Law.

Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching founded on

the oneness of mentor and disciple. And the

Lotus Sutra is likewise a scripture of the oneness

of mentor and disciple.

At the end of this writing, to convey the

importance of the mentor-disciple relationship

in walking the great path of attaining Buddha-

hood in this lifetime, Nichiren cites a passage

from the Supernatural Powers chapter of the

Lotus Sutra. Next time, I will discuss the pro-

found meaning of this passage, but suffice it to

say here that the path to attaining Buddhahood

is found in the practice of Bodhisattvas of

the Earth who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

the Law inherent in their lives, for both their

own happiness and that of others, and who teach

others to do the same.

Above all, the great path to attaining Buddha-

hood in this lifetime lies in practicing faith with

the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple,

making our minds one with the lofty mind of

the Buddha and not being swayed by our inner

darkness or the three poisonsgreed, anger and

foolishness. Faith based on the mentor-disciple

spirit is the key to opening the treasure within

our lives that is as vast as the universe. Moreover,

courageously exerting ourselves in chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and taking action for

kosen-rufu is the direct path to attaining Buddha-

hood in this lifetime.



3]

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

1, Nagarjuna: A Mahayana scholar of southern India, thought to have

lived between the years 150 and 250, who is especially known for his

systematization of the doctrine of nonsubstantiality, Nonsubstantial-

ity is the concept that things and phenomena have no fixed or

independent nature or existence of their own, Nagarjuna integrated

the practical doctrine of the Middle Way, transcending both asccti-

cism and hedonism, and the concept of dependent origination into

the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. In other words, by viewing all things

Not as entities with an eternally fixed nature but as always assuming

a temporary and changing aspect through their relation to other

things (i.e., dependent origination}, one can act based on a true per-

ception of reality, without either attachment or fixed prejudices (i.e.,

the Middle Way).

2. Unification of the three truths: Rased on the section in Nagarjunas

Treatise on the Mididle Way that integrates the concepts of nonsubstan-

tiality, dependent origination and the Middle Way, the Great Teacher

Tien-t'ai established the doctrine of the three truths: the truth of

nonsubstantiality, the truth of temporary existence and the truth of

the Middle Way. Further, he clarified that these truths, rather than

being separate and independent of one another, are three ways of

viewing any particular thing or entity, and that the three moreover

constitute an integral whole, each possessing all three within itself.

This is called the unification of the three truths.

formulated by Tien-tai to enable people to perceive the unification of

the three truths of nonsubstantiality, temporary existence and the

Middle Way. While the concept of the unification of the three truths

The Human Revolution, SKU #4182, $45.00

Revolutionary Reading

~

constitutes the doctrinal core of THen-t'ai's teachin

contemplation in a single mind constitutes the core

simultaneously and perfectly integrated and interfiised ty Wuths ag

nomenon, Tt is equal to observing a single moment of life Cach phe.

the three thousand realms within it, At the same tine, ay Seeing

that all phenomena consist of the three thousand tealms, Petceives

4. The Six Paramitas Sutra states: If you are always the m,

mind rather than letting your mind master you,

tun amok, Tt is just like taming an elephant

B) the threeg

Md

of the 1 Tenet

aster of you,

your mind wil} hot

5. The Buddha said: [L]ive as islands unto yourselves,

ta, or Law] as an island, with the Dhamma as your refuge, hi are

other refuge. Mahaparinibbana Sutta: The Great Pa ! a

dhas Last Days, in The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Trans! te

the Digha Nikaya, translated by Maurice Walshe (Boston: ene,

Publications, 1995), p, 245.

6, Ikegami brothers: Leading disciples of Nichiren Daishonin. The elder

brother, Munenaka, was twice disowned by the father, a follower of

Ryokan. At the same time, the father tempted Munenaga, the younger

brother, to abandon his faith and take his brother's place as the next

head of the family. Despite these adversities, the brothers persevered in

faith. The father rescinded Munenakas disinheritance and in the end

took faith in Nichirens teachings.

7. The passage states: After I [Shakyamuni] have passed into extinction,/

[one] should accept and uphold this sutra./ Such a person assuredly and

without doubt/ will attain the Buddha way (WND-1, 4; LSOC, 318).

being your own

The Human Revolution is SGI

President Ikedas account of second

Soka Gakkai president Josei Todas

life and the Soka Gakkais growth

in postwar Japan. It provides keen

insights into practicing Buddhism for

maximum benefit and strengthening

our Buddhist communitys ability to

bring happiness to more people, This

abridged two-book set isa wonderft ul

gift for yourself and to share with

fellow members, friends and family.

Available af your local

SGI-USA bookstore OF. from:

(800) 626-1313.  bookstore sgirusa.Ore

=~

Key Points

The Meaning of Myothe Middle Way

Nichiren describes this unfathomable nature of the

mind as the mystic entity of the Middle Way that is

the ultimate teality (WND-1, 4). The Middle Way

does not simply mean the middle course between

two extremes; it refers to a more lofty perspective

that is swayed by neither extreme but also

sound philosophy and practice transcending the

two then-prevailing extremes of hedonism and

asceticism, and he called this the Middle Way. In

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,

Nichiren says that the ultimate truth, which

transcends the two extremes of existence and

Nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the

Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of

truth, he calls it the ultimate reality. Transcending

xistence and nonexistence can be taken to mean

transcending impermanent phenomena that

alternate ceaselessly between existence and nonex-

Istence. Further, exhibiting the qualities of both

xistence and nonexistence while transcending

both does not refer to a transcendent or absolute

being divorced from impermanent phenomena,

but indicates the truly eternal that encompasses and

Tesides within impermanent phenomena. (p. 48)

The Meaning of Renge

the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect

The Mystic Law is not visible to the human eye.

Therefore, the Buddha uses a concrete symbol in

order to help people understand the Laws won-

drous and mystic nature. This is renge, meaning

lotus flower. Why does he employ the lotus

flower? Usually plants flower first and then bear

fruita relationship that is used to illustrate

linear or sequential causality, with the flowers

Buddhism, this is referred to as the nonsimultane-

ity of cause and effect. By contrast, the lotus flower

tains its fruit) simultaneouslyin other words, its

fruit is produced at the same time its petals open.

The lotus thus symbolizes the principle of the

simmultaneity of cause and effect. (p. 48)

The Meaning of Kyothe Practice

for Oneself and Others

We can regard this mystic kyo as the spread of the

Mystic Law from ourselves to others. When the

mind at this moment is understood to mean the

Buddhas mind and the mind at other moments

is taken to mean the minds of all living beings,

then kyo refers to the Buddhas teachings that

the mystic nature of life, or the mind of myo.

And the king of sutras that directly elucidates

the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the

sense, the development of kosen-rufu, with peo-

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for their

own happiness and that of others and teaching

others to do the same, could be said to corre-

spond to the mystic kyo. (p. 49)

Mastering One's Mind

the Path of Mentor and Disciple

To allow ourselves to be mastered by our minds

is to lead a self-centered existence. Ultimately,

we will be pulled this way and that by our con-

stantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism and

sink into the depths of darkness or ignorance.

Conversely, to become the master of our minds

is to live based on the Law. A teacher or mentor

in Buddhism is one who leads and connects

on which they should depend already exists

within their own lives. The disciples in turn seek

the mentor, who embodies and is one with the

Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, they

this way, they lead lives in which they become

masters of their minds. In other words, the

lives in complete accord with the Law, and who

teaches people about the vast inner potential

they possessis indispensable for attaining

Buddhahood in this lifetime. (p. 51)

53

Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path

of the Oneness of Mentor and Disciple

o 6

Oo ae ae a ae Sal Dall Sale Ce ae Oo Oe Oe,

If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle [that the

- entity of your life is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law], you are certain to

"attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states, After I have

_ Person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way [The Lotus

wer Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 318]. Never doubt in the slightest.

chiren (On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

ds follow the path of birds, and fish

follow the Path of fish. Similarly, there humankind. This path is none other than the

is a path for us to follow in life for

Practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

The path of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo is, in a sense, the most natural way for

achieving happiness as human beings, Ordi-

nary people cannot easily see this correct

Nichiren Daishonin opened the indestruc-

tible path to happinessthe great path of

54

ae SO oy ea

human beings to achieve enlightenment. This

1s because it is the means for us to reveal the

mystic truth that is originally inherent in our

li i

yi in way in which chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo allows us to manifest this

Innate mystic truth.

For i i

hl a instance, he writes (and I have inserted

Italics in these passages):

ae sequently attained are all con-

ae en If we believe in

os ve characters, we will naturally

Be err the same benefits as he

g the Mind WND-1, 365)

five characters of Myoho-renge-

mee not represent the sutra text, nor

oe Se: meaning. They are nothing

Mes an the intent of the entire

ae even though the beginners in

a8 ist Practice may not understand

ir significance, by practicing these

five characters, they will naturally con-

form to the sutras intent. (On the

Four Stages of Faith and the Five

Stages of Practice, WND-1, 788)

If we do not harbor doubts in our

hearts, we will as a matter of course

attain Buddhahood. (The Opening of

the Eyes, WND-1, 283)

Because Myoho-renge-kyo is the inherent

Law of life to which the Buddha became

certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime

(WND-1, 4).

a

We may call it the most natural path, how-

make personal effort. As with any path, in order

to enable many people to follow it, the way has

to be opened, obstructions must be removed

and a clear pathway must be trodden. Similarly,

the path of chanting entails a struggle to

maintain faith that Myoho-renge-kyo exists

within us and to defeat the fundamental dark-

ness inherent in our lives.

When we embrace the five characters of

Myoho-renge-kyo, we can positively transform

the cycles of negativity, delusion and suffering

that our lives have repeatedly undergone as 4

naturally engrave deep within us the causality

for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Here, faith is the cause, and manifesting

the life-state of Buddhahood is the effect.

To engrave the causality for attaining Bud-

dhahood deep in our lives, therefore, is to

vanquish through faith the inner darkness that

is the source of evil and misery, and to bring

the rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo, the inherent

mystic truth, to pulse vibrantly in our lives. The

life-state of Buddhahood is perfectly in tune

with this rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo.

Through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

the causality of Buddhahood will come to sup-

in our lives. And when we forge strong faith

that is impervious to any attack of fundamen-

tal darkness or devilish functions, the causality

for attaining Buddhahood takes root in the

very core of our beings.

Faith, therefore, is absolutely crucial, That is

why Nichiren underscores the importance of

having deep faith in sharing the principle that

our lives are entities of the Mystic Law (see

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

WND-1, 4). Indeed, we find Nichiren stressing

the importance of faith throughout On

Attaining Buddhahood in this Lifetime. For

instance, he writes: Summon up deep faith

(WND-1, 3), and Arouse deep faith (WND-1,

4). He teaches that deepening our faith is the

The key to our enlightenment as ordinary

can believe this truththat, by manifesting the

Mystic Law inherent within our lives, we can

definitely attain Buddhahood.

Were They Not Bodhisattvas

of the Earth, They Could Not

Chant the Daimoku

The kind of faith needed for attaining Buddha-

hood in this lifetime could thus be described as

the hallmark of Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

Nichiren Daishonin writes, These bodhi-

Sattvas are the ones who had thoroughly forged

their resolvein other words, they possessed

thoroughly forged faith (General Stone

Tiger, WND-1, 953).

At the end of On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime, Nichiren cites the following

Thus Come One chapter of the Lotus Sutra:

After I have passed into extinction, [one]

should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a

the Buddha way (LSOC, 318). He quotes this

as scriptural evidence of gaining enlighten-

ment through chanting the daimoku {or title]

of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo. We can

forged faith of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is

56

dhahood in this lifetime.

In the Supernatural Powers chapter,

Shakyamuni Buddha transfers the essence of

the Lotus Sutra to Bodhisattva Superior Prac-

tices and the other Bodhisattvas of the Earth,

He then outlines how these bodhisattvas

should exert themselves in propagating the

sutra after his passing. The above passage

cited by Nichiren at the end of On Attaining

Buddhahood in This Lifetime is the conclud-

ing part of Shakyamunis description of

benefits to be gained as a result of those

uphold this sutra means accepting and

upholding the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra,

Myoho-renge-kyothe essence of the teach-

ing transmitted by the Buddha to Bodhisattva

Superior Practices.

In The True Aspect of All Phenomena,

Nichiren writes, Were they not Bodhisattvas of

the Earth, they could not chant the daimoku

(WND-1, 385). What is it that makes the chant-

ing of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo so difficult then?

Viewed from one perspective, it is because

breaking through fundamental darkness and

triumphing over devilish functions requires us

to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with strong,

thoroughly forged faith.

Chanting and Teaching Others

To Do the Same

Further, the true significance of the Bodhi-

Sattvas of the Earths practice of chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo lies in their not only

carrying out this practice themselves but teach-

ing others to do the same. In other words, it is

a practice for both self and others.

In his treatise The Three Great Secret

Laws. Nichiren Daishonin notes that, in the

Middle Day of the Law, Tien-tai and his

teacher Nan-Yiieh both chanted the daimoku

of the Lotus Sutra, but they did so merely as a

Nichiren clarifies that, in contrast, he not only

chants it himself but teaches this practice to

others.

The daimoku of the Middle Day remained

merely an emblem for perceiving the mystic

truth; it was not employed to actually lead peo-

of Nichiren Daishonin encompasses both prac-

tice for oneself and othersit has the actual

faith, to break through fundamental darkness

and enable all people to reveal their innate

Buddhahood,

SGI President Ikeda at

the November 10, 2006,

Headquarters Leaders

Meeting in Tokyo, Japan.

Also, in The Object of Devotion for

Observing the Mind, Nichiren refers to the

the actual practice of the five characters of

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo (WND-1, 375). Actual

and establishing the causality of Buddhahood

as a reality in ones life.

The actual practice of daimoku of the

Bodhisattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of

the Law means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo for the enlightenment of all peoplea

oneself and others. As Nichiren indicates

when he says At first only Nichiren chanted

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three,

and a hundred followed, the essence of this

57

tions like those described in the

(The True Aspect of All ae sutra hatred and jealousy, slander and

teaching it to others . aaicult and nine easy acts,> and

Phenomena, WND-1, 385). ted bythe adus the six diffi +466 Nichirens true

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted bY the three powerful enemies.

i The veas of the E th is characterized lifeblood or heritage flows in the mentors and

cee faith to overcome disciples united for kosen-rufu.

nd of the chant of true

, thoroughly forged

mis eee functions, and by Prac Now, the sou

for both ourselves and others. Its essenc Bodhisattvas of the Earth resounds throughout

short, is faith dedicated to kosen-Tufu. tab- the world. Without the kosen-rufu-directed

Shortly after Nichitep P ith and obstacle-d

lishment of his teaching, ready ra met i spread by the Soka Gakkai, the practice

battle all obstacles, ae Je of attaining of Nichiren Buddhism for attaining Buddha-

Polder ere A fighting faith through which we take on

chirens li momentous struggle to

= ec and overcome the three obstacles and four dev-

state of Buddhahood. There is

was a succession of great difficulties and perse- ils opens the life-

slid focus on how Nichiren no attaining enlightenment without struggling

ms i re a : = ssi against the three powerful enemies. Those who

work unceasingly for kosen-rufu are genuine

Buddhas.

Our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei

Toda, taught us the substance of the great state

I of Buddhahood in concrete terms. Mr. Todas

u life was not an easy, uneventful one; it was a

and life of painful vicissitudes.

To seek in Buddhism a life of peace and

quiet, free of trouble, goes against its basic

tenets. The lives of Shakyamuni Buddha and

Nichiren Daishonin were fierce struggles, any-

thing but tranquil and trouble-free.

could be said that the genuine spirit of

m lies in establishing a towering,

ctible state of life that not even the

obstacle can harm. True attainment

hahood = this lifetime means con-

cpa Strong faith that will absolutely not

be defeated by devilish functions. hs is

ugh their own examples.

Viewed from the Buddhist perspective,

Mr. Toda dedicated his life to demonstrating

the state of Buddhahood of one who follows

the highest human path. As his true, direct dis-

ciple, I proudly proclaim the great victory of

my mentors human revolution.

Overflowing With Life Force,

Fulfilling Our Mission

But just what is attaining Buddhahood? In

discussing this question, President Toda con-

oe declared it meant securing eternal

Se achieving a state of being that allows us

2 always be reborn overflowing with powerful

life force, to fulfill our mission to our hearts

content, to achieve all our goals and to possess

good fortune that no one can destroy. These

are words of true philosophy that get at the

Beart of attaining Buddhahood in language

that is simple and straightforward.

; Mr. Toda continued, And is it not greater

still if we can enjoy tens, hundreds, thousands,

ins of millions of existences in this way? I can

still hear his voice ringing in my ears, filled with

indomitable confidence and conviction like the

mighty roar of a lion king.

Those who have dedicated themselves to the

Mystic Law will, on each successive rebirth,

overflow with vibrant life force, accomplish

a mission for kosen-rufu that only they can

achieve and enjoy immense, indestructible

good fortune. They can joyfully savor such lives

again and again.

Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, one

could say, allows us to solidly enter this eternal

=

done so. As long as actual proof of the Mystic

Law continues to blossom brilliantly in each

shine eternally. Mr. Toda declared that the life of

in future sutras as Soka Gakkai Buddha.

Of course, each aspect of birth, aging, sick-

ness and death is part of the reality of our lives

in this world. Our physical bodies cannot

tion, continuance, decline and disintegration to

which all phenomena in the universe are sub-

ject. Naturally, our bodies deteriorate as we

age. If practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism

were to retain youthful bodies forever, it would

go against the laws of nature! As we thoroughly

inner essence of our lives will never decay.

I hope that all our pioneering and senior

members who have dedicated themselves to

kosen-rufu with such sincerity over the years

will cheerfully, proudly adorn the final chapter

of their lives with noble victory, confident of

this point. Please continue to strive with the

spirit of fresh challenge! Looking at Nichirens

writings, there is absolutely no doubt that those

who forge such a fighting spirit in this existence

do attain the lofty spiritual state allowing them

to make their way freely, joyfully, through the

journey of eternal life.

In describing this free, untrammeled state

of life that continues across eternity and

would often say humorously: We die, but we

are reborn. For my part, I would like to come

back as a stunning beauty! He would then go

on to joke that this beauty would be famous

around the world, with people flocking to buy

her photos and get her autograph. Of course,

59

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

he said, she would never give her autograph to

bad or hateful people.

Mr. Toda died at fifty-eightnot an old age

by any means. The two years he had spent in

left his health seriously damaged. And the

intense frenzy of activity over the next several

years, which saw him work all out to rebuild

the Soka Gakkai and fulfill his duties as presi-

dent, also brought bouts of illness.

When a Soka Gakkai leader once asked him

why he was ill, Mr. Toda answered: My being

sick like this represents a great lessening of

Mr. Toda, inspired by the majestic form

of indomitable Mount Fuji, dauntlessly took

the lead for kosen-rufu until his very last

moment. I firmly believe his noble life is an

in this lifetime.

The Lions Roar of Mentor

and Disciple United

Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we

cannot attain Buddhahood. Through that sort

of spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood

becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of

our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be

spirit of true cause, of always starting from

now; the resolve to never regress in faith; the

heart of a lion king; the refusal to be defeated;

faith that grows stronger day by day.

Thus Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, chanted with

this spirit, is none other than the source of infinite

advance. No painful difficulty or karma is an

obstacle for the daimoku of lion kings. Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo has the power to turn adversity

into a springboard for growth, to change karma

into mission, to transform even sorrow into a

wellspring of creativity. Nichiren Daishonins very

life pulses in Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

The daimoku of Soka Gakkai members

Tuggling for kosen-rufu is the same as the

chanted by our first and second

achieve the great desire of the happiness of all

humankind. If we forget this fighting daimoku

of courageous lion Kings, our chanting will

deviate from that of our mentors, In that case,

our chanting will not produce the sound of the

lion's toar, which is created by mentor and dis-

ciple chanting together. Not only will it not be

the daimoku of Nichiren, it will constitute the

Piactice of an inferior teaching that has no

telation to the spirit of Shakyamuni.

We may surmise that Nichiren quotes the

oe eo final section of this writing to teach

Tied ae spirit of mentor and disciple.

ings, which are the heart of the Soka

Mee memes directly connected to

ine : ae with the admonition: Never

i in the slightest . . . Maintain your faith

attain Buddhahood in this lifetime

(WND-1, 4). Faith is absolutely essential.

ae return to the opening of this writing,

a talks of freeing ourselves from the

nce time without beginning and attaining

without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this

lifetime (see WND-1, 3). The purpose of our

Present existence is to cut the chains of suffering

i toe goings eg

we have endured from the beginningless past

and establish the eternal state of Buddhahood.

By challenging ourselves with all our hearts so

as to have no regrets in this lifetime, we can

forge a state of life victorious and free of

I know

the wonder of

supreme happiness

and the brilliant victory

of a great life.

I composed this poem at the start of 2006

with the wish that all SGI members will lead

tremendously fulfilling lives. May each of you

make your way triumphantly along the path of

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, enjoy-

ing this supreme happiness and the brilliant

victory of a great life

Let us resolutely win in the struggle to

attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, which con-

denses eternity into this present moment, and

let us joyfully continue our journey of kosen-



1, Bodhisattvas of the Earth: Disciples of Shakyamuni from the remote

von whom he calls forth in the Emerging from the Earth chapter of

le Lotus Sutra and entrusts with propagating the Lotus Sutra after his

- m the earth. Their leader is called Superior Practices.

Powers chapter of the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni entrusts the sutras

teaching to Bodhisattva Superior Practices and the other Bodhisattvas

of the Earth. This is called the transfer of the essence because

Shakyamuni describes the sutra as containing: 1) all the doctrines

natural powers of the Thus Come One; 3) the storehouse of all the

secret essentials of the Thus Come One; and 4) all the most profound

matters of the Thus Come One. adding that all these are prociai

3, Nichiren writes, Now, however, we have entered the Latter Day of the

Law, and the daimoku that I, Nichiren, chant is different from that of

for oneself and the teaching of others (On the Receiving of the Three

WND-2, 986),

(Nam-myoho-renge-kyo) has

Great Secret Laws, W ,

4. The daimoku of the essent :

the daimoku of practice. The

the latter to chant Nam~

ial te:

two aspects: the daimoku of (ais an

former means to believe

5, Six difficult and nine easy acts: The Treasure Tower chapter of the

Lotus Sutra explains from six perspectives the difficulty of practicing

the Lotus Sutra after Shakyamunis passing. By contrast, it describes

nine seemingly impossible actions, such as throwing Mount Sumeru

into another world system, as comparatively easy (see LSOC 218-19).

6. Three powerful enemies: The verse section of the Encouraging

Devotion chapter of the Lotus Sutra describes the people who will

Shakyamunis passing. In his Annotations on The Words and Phrases

of the Lotus Sutra," Miao-lo describes these people as belonging to

three categories: arrogant lay people, arrogant monks and nuns, and

arrogant false sages (see LSOC, 233-34).

7. Lessening karmic retribution: The principle that one can experience

the effects of bad karma from the past to a lesser degree because of

& The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings says: The lions roar

(shishi ku) is the preaching of the Buddha. The preaching of the Law

means the preaching of the Lotus Sutra, or the preaching of Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo in particular. The first shi of the word shishi, or lion

[which means teacher, is the Wonderful Law that is passed on by the

teacher. The second shi [which means child] is the Wonderful Law as it

is received by the disciples. The roar [of the term lion's roar) is the

sound of the teacher and the disciples chanting in unison (OTT, 111).

61

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Key Points

The Path of Chanting Faith Dedicated to Kosen-rufu

Is the Natural Way To The actual practice of daimoku of the Bodhi-

Achieve Enlightenment sattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of the Law

The path of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is, cee oe Se ene hye - the

ina sense, the most natural way for human beings enlightenment of all peoplea practice aiming

to achieve enlightenment. This is because itisthe for the happiness of both oneself and others, As

means for us to reveal the mystic truth that is Nichiren indicates when he says At first only

originally inherent in our lives (see WND-1, 3), Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but

Nichiren emphasizes the very natural way i then two, three, and a hundred followed, the

; : essence of this practice is chanting it ourselves

and also teaching it to others (The True Aspect

of All Phenomena WND-1, 385).

The Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted by the

Bodhisattvas of the Earth is characterized by

deep, thoroughly forged faith to overcome dark-

ness and devilish functions, and by practice for

both ourselves and others. Its essence, in short, is

faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. (pp. 57-58)

Opening the Life-State of Buddhahood

A fighting faith through which we take on and

overcome the three obstacles and four devils opens

the life-state of Buddhahood. There is no attaining

for kosen-rufu are genuine Buddhas. (p. 58)

Attaining Buddhahood

With a Challenging Spirit

Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we can-

not attain Buddhahood. Through that sort of

spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood

_ established as a solid, shining pillar of

our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be

Spirit of true cause, of always starting from now;

the resolve to never regress in faith; the heart of a

lion king; the refusal to be defeated; faith that

Brows stronger day by day, (p, 60)

Index

A

action, Buddhist wisdom into, 12;

taking, 43, 51

attitude, 29, 32, 34, 41

B

bodhisattvas, 39

Bodhisattvas of the Earth, 56; practice of

the, 57-58

Buddha(s), 13, 31, 50, 58; and ordinary

Bodhisattva Superior Practices

and, 56

Buddhahood, 2-9, 13-14, 17-18, 21-24,

29-34, 39, 41-43, 47, 49-51,

54-61; scriptural evidence of

attaining, 56. See also Myoho-

Buddhism, 13, 17, 22, 47

Cc

Cause and effect, 21, 4849, 55

challenging spirit, 41

compassion, 43

courage, 34, 41, 43

D

daimoku [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo],

56-57, 60-61

Devadatta chapter (Lotus Sutra), 4

difficulties, 34, 55

The Difficulty of Sustaining Faith, 41

E

Earthly Desires are Enlightenment, 42

Emerging from the Earth chapter

(Lotus Sutra), 43

The Entity of the Mystic Law, 14

Expedient Means chapter (Lotus

Sutra), 40

F

faith, 3, 57, 9, 20-22, 24-25, 30-34,

39-43, 49-51, 55-61; dedicated to

kosen-rufu, 58

The Farther the Source, the Longer the

Stream, 42

fighting spirit, to battle our inner funda-

mental darkness, 40, 59, 60

fundamental darkness, 8, 18, 20-21, 24,

29-32, 34, 39-42, 47, 49, 51,

55-58

G

General Stone Tiger, 56

Gohonzon, 31

grave offenses, 30

H

happiness, 2, 13, 21-22, 43

Happiness in This World, 21, 41

heart, importance of, 5, 6, 21, 29, 34, 38;

39, 47, 49, See also mind

ho, 48

How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way

Can Attain Buddhahood through

the Lotus Sutra, 23

63

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

human existence, 11

humankind, 18; changing destiny of, 8-9,

17, 49. See also kosen-rufu

I

inner change, 5-6, 8, 29, 38-39, 49

K

kosen-rufu, 33, 42, 51, 58-61. See also

humankind

Myoho-renge-kyo, 14-15, 17, 21, 23, 47, 49,

55, See also Buddhahood; mystic

truth; Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

Mystic Law, 6, 22-24, 29, 33-34, 39, 50,

56, 59. See also Myoho-renge-kyo;

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

mystic truth, 6, 13-17, 21, 41, 47, 49, 55,

57; manifesting the, 4. See also

Myoho-renge-kyo

N

Nagarjuna, 48

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, 3, 11-12, 15-18,

20-24, 26, 29-34, 38-43, 47,

49-51, 54-55, 57; and fighting

spirit, 60; mirror analogy, 6,

37-A0, 42, 47. See also Buddha-

hood; Myoho-renge-kyo

Nan-Yiieh, 57

negative functions, 55; defeating, 5

Nichikan, 14, 18, 31, 40

Nichiren Buddhism, 2-4, 7-9, 12, 14,

16-18, 20, 26, 30-31, 33-34,

40-41, 43, 50-51, 57-59

Nichiren Daishonin, 2-4, 6-9, 11-15,

17-18, 20-21, 23, 25-26, 28-30,

32, 34, 37-42, 46-49, 54-58,

60-61; admonition of, 24, 31, 50;

and human beings, 5

Nirvana Sutra, 50

non-Buddhist thinking, 29-31

_ The Object of Devotion for Observing

the Mind, 21, 55, 57

~ On Persecutions Befalling the Sage, 42

On the Four Stages of Faith and the

Five Stages of Practice, 55

ordinary people, 4, 21-22, 24, 38, 48, 50,

54, 56

P

Persecution by Sword and Staff, 58

myoho-renge-kyo, 39-42

Provisional teachings. See pre-Lotus

Sutra teachings

Pushkin, Aleksandr, 18

R

The Record of Orally Transmitted Teach-

ings, 29-30, 42-43

Ryokan, 51

S

seeking the Law of Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo, 6, 8, 25, 28-32

The Selection of the Time, 22

SGI, members of the, 3, 9, 33, 61

Shakyamuni, 11, 1314, 30, 48, 50, 56,

58, 61

Six Paramitas Sutra, 50

Six-Volume Writings (Nichikan), 31

slander, 32-33

Soka Gakkai, 31, 33, 59; members, 42,

59-60; and Nichirens writings, 61

The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra, 21, 47

substituting faith for wisdom, 30-31, 35

sufferings of birth and death, 2, 3, 4, 11,

12, 13, 28, 37, 38, 39, 61

Supernatural Powers chapter (Lotus

Sutra), 51, 56, 61

T

The Teaching, Practice and Proof, 34

The Three Great Secret Laws, 57

three thousand realms in a single

moment of life, 14, 15, 18, 24

The True Aspect of All Phenomena, 7,

56, 58

Tien-tai, 14, 16-17, 48, 57; Buddhism

of, 30

Toda, Josei, 24, 33, 42, 51, 58; on Bud-

dhahood, 59-60; on illness, 60;

and the Mystic Law, 25; Soka

Gakkai Buddha, 59; on the

young womens division, 34; on

youth, 43

Toki Jonin, 3

transmigration, 12-13

twenty-first century, transforming, 2

U

unity, 33

Vv

victory, 43

Vimalakirti, 39

Vimalakirti Sutra, 38-39

wW

wisdom, Buddhist, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,

30, 32, 38, 43, 48

65

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Key Points:

The Essence of Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

The Law contained in the practice of chanting

spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous, But even the

ina life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the

inner darkness that prevents us from believing in

the Mystic Law and staying focused on our own

Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of

chanting enables us to break through this darkness

and vibrantly bring forth our Buddhahood. Bat-

tling our fundamental darknessthis inner

struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myoho-

The Heart of Buddhism

Tf we seek enlightenment outside of us, we are not

which enables us to overcome the fundamental evil

of ignorance or darkness. In that case, all our

be lacking the vital ingredient; they will be every

bit as futile as counting a neighbor's vast riches.

Moreover, because none of these efforts will help

us eradicate our ignorance, they will only become

an endless, painful austerity. This battle against

ignorance is the heart of Buddhism. (p. 30)

The Driving Force for

Our Transformation

If we chant to the Gohonzon but always blame

other people or our environment for our circum-

stances, we are avoiding the challenge of tackling

our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we

are seeking enlightenment outside of us. By chang-

ing ourselves on a more profound level that we

can begin to improve our situation, Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that

change. (p. 31)

36

Confident and Concrete Prayer

The erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the

Mystic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its

core an inability to believe that all peopleour-

selves and otherspossess the Buddha nature.

And this disbelief stems from fundamental dark-

ness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to

skeptically regard the Buddha nature as a nice

ideal but one that doesnt really change reality will

manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking in

conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted,

we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally

transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this

writing when he says, You must summon up deep

faith (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inher-

Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this

lifetimewe must continue striving to deepen our

faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-

tenge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will

manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43)

Overcoming Grumbling

and Complaining

Grumbling and complaining are the principal

gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find

ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of

ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual,

it will act as a constant brake on our growth and

cause us to forget about advancing and improving

ourselves, We will then effectively close off our own

outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to

stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive

from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these

tendencies and use them as a springboard for pos-

itive growth and development. (p. 32)

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

With a Brave and Vigorous Spirit

Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge

a Aer 5 Oo

6 

The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas emancipation

in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities

of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It

also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands,

our minds.

It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is

called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This

is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A

mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar-

nished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror,

true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day

and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo. (On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime. The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

37

the great treasure storehouse that brings good

fortune and happiness to all. The important thing

is to live out our lives based on and completely in

sync with the Law; it is to imbue and solidify our

lives with the Mystic Law.

Our daily realities are filled with an endless

succession of problems. But with the firm belief

that our lives are Myoho-renge-kyo, we should

strive to boldly challenge everything with the

unwavering conviction that we can overcome all

hardships and become happy without fail. When

we maintain deep faith based on the foundation

that I am Myoho-renge-kyo, we can take on any

lies in whether we can bring forth courage. Not a

shrinking timidity but a challenging courage

this is what we need to have!

Irrespective of the obstacles we may encounter

in the course of our practice, we must not retreat

a single step. We must not be alarmed or startled

by them. The power of the Mystic Law (Myoho-

deeply confident of this is most important.

Fearing hardships and bemoaning and resent-

ing our environment are to believe that the Law is

outside our own lives. So is losing confidence in

our ability to overcome our circumstances and

turning to others in the hope that they will save

us, or blaming others for our problems, or giving

When difficulties beset us, no matter how try-

ing they may be, we must clearly see them for the

obstacles or devilish functions they are and battle

of life of those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

and dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law.

Nichiren Daishonin says, [My] disciples cannot

accomplish anything if they are cowardly (The

Teaching, Practice, and Proof WND-1, 481). In

34

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

accord with these words, lets cast aside cowardice

and make courage our foremost attribute.

People of courageous faith can break through

the dark clouds of fear, ignorance and delusion to

bring the sun of the Mystic Law to shine and

beautiful flowers of Myoho-rengethe lotus of

the Mystic Lawto bloom in their lives.

President Toda gave the following guidance to

young womens division members in the pioneer-

ing days of our movement: You should take

the Latter Day. Win in life with a noble spirit. You

must absolutely never depreciate yourselves.

Nichiren Buddhism starts from the realization

that the supreme life-condition of Buddhahood

transformationa transformation of our funda-

mental attitude or mind-set. Thats why Nichiren

what's in our hearts.

He writes: Whether you chant the Buddha's

name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and

incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits

and roots of goodness in your life. With this convic-

tion you should strive in faith (WND-1, 4). All our

the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo each morning and evening, as well as all of our

various Soka Gakkai activitiesare virtuous acts

that implant benefits and roots of goodness in

our lives. Those who advance with this deep aware-

ness will be true victors who travel the direct path

to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Always upholding the great philosophy

is important (WND-1, 1000), let us lead magnif-

icent, victorious lives!



The Annotations on Great Concentration and Insight.

Meanings of myo: In The Daimoku of the Lotus Sutra,

ic Daishonin writes: Myo means to be fully endowed,

hich in turn has the meaning of perfect and full (WND-1, 146);

ter myo means to open (WND-I, 145); and Myo

to revive, that is, to return to life (WND-1, 149).

hanging nature inherent in all things and phenomena.

directions refers to the entire universe, all physical space.

, the ten directions are the eight directions of the com-

orth, south, east, west, northwest, northeast, southeast and

stplus up and down. Buddhist scriptures refer to the

xistence of Buddha lands in all directions throughout the uni-

 each with its own Buddha. The expression the Buddhas of the

i in the sutras indicates these Buddhas. The phrase ten

often appears with the phrase three existences, meaning

and three existences thus means all Buddhas throughout

and time.

Substituting faith for wisdom: The principle that faith is the true

 for gaining supreme wisdom, and faith alone leads to

itenment.

inherent mystic truth: The fundamental Law, Mystic

v or Buddha nature with which all life is originally endowed.

_atlous obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that

- pPear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith.

1 was the twenty-sixth chief priest of Taiseki-ji, the head

Tevered as the restorer of Nichirens teachings because he worked to

their true meaning. During the four centuries after Nichiren

's death, a number of errors and misconceptions had

arisen as his followers split into many schools. Nichikan nel

tirelessly to clarify the true meaning of Nichirens tacking: 

completed exegeses on Nichirens five major writings and Cr

works, and authored The Six- Volume Writings, which fers

the correct interpretations of Nichirens teachings from misleading

ones,

10. The provisional teachings that preceded the Lotus Sutra do os

13.

teach that the world of Buddhahood exists in all people, as :

instead describe Buddhas as idealized and superior beings. he,

Pure Land (Nembutsu) teachings, for example, explain that ins' a

of relying on ones own efforts, one should exclusively

salvation through such a Buddhanamely, Amida. i

_ In The Fourteen Slanders, Nichiren writes: There i$ 8 mere a

if one chants the daimoku while acting against the pie

sutra ... Always remember that econ dey ae cai

lutely be the last to abuse one another.

wae pats Sutra are most certainly Buddhas. and one who slan-

i  (WND-1, 756).

ders. a Buddha commits a grave offense ( de

12. In The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life? ahr

of Nichiren gh

myoho-renge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but ee

transcending all differences among Ce caper sated

arable as fish and the water in which the} ee sae

disciples and {ay supporters

tion. When you are so united, even =

In The True Aspect of Ail Phenomena Nichares hae oes

only Nichiren chanted Nam-mvoho-renge-Kyo. Prd

three, and a hundred followed, chanting and teaching oF ae

agation will unfold this way in the Loong

signify emerging from the earth? (WND-1, .

35

Sanereneigieeestetoees _

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

ith, wher i summon up deep faith (WND-1,

uel of practicing "dependent ne sina Bes ee abe to make Sit inherent ae

Sinai dita oe piste of nature the basis of our livesor as Nichiren

oicoi belt aaa aca ice of terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime

our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as

and concrete prayer.

> our practice of faith is aimed at

Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is essen-

am-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like trying

arrow: without a clear target, we won t

aw with any real force or determina-

Same way, when we replace vague

n concrete determinations and con-

we can definitely accomplish what

d complaining are the principal

uous, elusive doubt and disbe-

iow it is wrong, we may find

and complaining in spite of

behavior become habitual,

nt brake on our growth and

ut advancing and improv-

alling into the path of seeking the

While it might be a real chal-

mbling and complaining, we can

1e Mystic Law the wisdom to control

and use them as a springboard

Owth and development,

ic Buard against slandering our

ing and harboring resent-

sy toward others results in denyj

Nature, The inabi; a

ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha

oe is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra,

which teaches that all people have the potential for

Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly

warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra,

Not only won't we accomplish our desire to attain

Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up

committing slander of the Law."

Also, unless we practice together united in the

spirit of many in body, one in mind, the great

desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.*

Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves

and others is the true means for attaining Bud-

dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the

The Spirit of the First Three Presidents

Pulses in the Soka Gakkai

A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of

the Law in each persons life is one that treasures

the individual. It calls out to each person, encour-

ages his or her individual human revolution and

seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the

appearance of one person after another embracing

faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily

g from the earth to propagate the Law, and

the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.

This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first

three presidentsTsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei

Toda and myselfhave steadfastly followed.

That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phe-

nomenal development and why our kosen-ruf

movement has spread throughout the entire world.

> i



Rn @ e Py

Ce Caer ea)  4  6 8 *

 Muerte Og Og 0g 9 Cg Ms u, uv, vv. TP ae ne

In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the

Law as existing outside ones own life tend to be

authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and

uals or clerical authority, while their followers

dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak-

ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings

greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes

after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have

come to function almost exclusively as purveyors

of funeral and memorial services for the deceased,

devolving into what is known as funeral Bud-

dhism. They offer no philosophy that empowers

The Soka Gakkais founder, President

Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a

teaching for transforming ones life. To believe

that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo exists

within us is to have the confidence that we will

definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood

in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working

for kosen-rufu through sharing Nichiren Bud-

dhism based on the conviction that it holds the

key to happiness for both ourselves and others.

This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and

the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the

first three presidents spirit of the oneness of

mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this

most difficult of challengesthat of awakening

President Toda used to say, You should

Law is the highly effective medicine (The Lotus

Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 269)

that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also

33

Se

On arene

; Buddha |

in This Lifetime

aia yA Mt ge POS se ips ve Ad ?

Wade

=.

: ies

SGI President Ikedas Lecture Ser

ment to truth and justice never lose

hope, even amid the greatest hardship or

difficulty. Rather, they serve as a bright beacon

illuminating the darkness of peoples suffering,

imparting inspiration, assurance and courage.

When we change, the world changes. The

key to all change is in our inner transforma-

tiona change in our hearts and minds. This is

human revolution. We all have the power to

change. When we realize this truth of life, we

can bring forth that power anywhere, anytime

and in any situation.

Nichiren Buddhism, based on the transfor-

mative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has made

this great path of inner change available to

all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho-

This time, Pll discuss the Passage in which

Nichiren Daishonin outlines the basic attitude

and approach to our fundamental practice of

ie whose hearts shine with a commit-

Changing Ourselves

and Changing the Land

As I have already touched on at length, the

lives. And the key to attaining Buddhahoodthe

ultimate transformation of our life-statealso

lies in a change in our hearts, or minds,

To convey this point, Nichiren Daishonin

here summarizes a point from the Vimalakirti

Sutra:' When one seeks the Buddhas emanci-

38

On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime

Seen Oo", Oe Og &"n O"n On

finds that ordinary beings are the entities of

and death are nirvana? (WND-1, 4). .

Ordinary beings are the entities of enlight-

Buddhahood (enlightenment) manifests in the

lives of ordinary people steeped in earthly

desires. Similarly, the sufferings of birth and

death are nirvana means that the Buddha life-

State of true peace and tranquillity (nirvana)

manifests in the lives of ordinary people tot

mented by the sufferings of birth and death.

Here, Nichiren explains that Buddhas and

ordinary people are not separated by an insur-

mountable divide; that the only thing setting

them apart is the difference in the minds of

ordinary beings.

Nichiren also cites the passage from the

Vimalakirti Sutra that explains the difference

between pure and impure lands. This passage

which Nichiren summarizes as If the minds of

living beings are impure, their land is also

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their

land*clarifies that there are not two separate

lands; the only difference between pure and

impure lands is the good or evil of our minds.

The view shown here is one in which the pure

Jand does not exist in some otherworldly realm

but in the real world, and is achieved by people

changing themselves inside, This is a dynamic

and practical view of the pure land

the idea of to purify Buddha lands expounded

in the Lotus Sutra (The Lotus Sutra and Its

Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 117),

The Vimalakirti Sutra passa

 based on

BE cited by Nichj-

bout the Illness

ie,

or fifth, chapter. This chapter describes the

Buddhist lay believer and practitioner of the

bodhisattva way who has fallen ill, and Manju-

shri, one of Shakyamunis leading disciples, who

is visiting him. When asked the cause of his

illness, Vimalakirti replies, Because all living

beings are sick, therefore I am sick.* This is a

well-known passage that succinctly reveals the

fundamental bodhisattva spirit of taking on

others sufferings as ones own.

Vimalakirti goes on to say that bodhisattvas

choose to be born among living beings afflicted

by delusion and to share in the sufferings of

birth and death in order to instruct and guide

those living beings to enlightenment. More-

over, bodhisattvas are never overwhelmed or

swayed by suffering, because they have estab-

lished a pure state of enlightenment within.

Thus, the passages from the Vimalakirti

Sutra cited by Nichiren clarify the meaning of

Buddhahood and the pure land from the stand-

amid the realities of daily life. Nichiren, there-

fore, states in conclusion, When deluded, one

is called an ordinary being, but when enlight-

other words, the difference between ordinary

difference between delusion and enlightenment

in ordinary peoples minds. How, then, can we

transform delusion into enlightenment?

In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains

that when peoples hearts change, the land or

their external environment can also change. At

its foundation is a transformation from delu-

sion to enlightenment.

As discussed earlier, what makes this trans-

formation possible is the practice of chanting

, 6%

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual

level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can

overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the

with which we are originally endowed.

Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe

this fundamental potential for change, saying,

This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will

shine like a jewel when polished (WND-1, 4).

In this way, he conveys that the practice of

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyothe means

for defeating our inner darknessserves to

polish our lives.

All living beings are inherently entities of the

Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud-

dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of

the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin-

drance, whenever and in whatever form it is

needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life

to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even

though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we

cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our

lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a

benighted state, we are like a tarnished mirror

that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing

the tarnished mirror of our lives.

The Path for Polishing Our Lives:

(1) Brave Challenge

Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chant-

ing as a practice for polishing our lives: A mind

now clouded by the illusions of the innate dark-

ness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when

[ie., the Dharma nature] and the true aspect of

39