Chapter 4: "It Is the Heart That Is Important"

Section 4.1: Living with an Awareness of the Importance of the Heart

Our inner transformation through revealing our inherent Buddhahood will transform not only our own lives, but also our environment and the entire world. President Ikeda has always stressed this philosophy for achieving unshakable happiness, and this chapter introduces many important teachings on that subject.

I was talking with someone yesterday, and our conversation turned to the question of what is the ultimate message of Nichiren Daishonin's writings. We concluded that the first essential message is to base ourselves on the Gohonzon. It is to make the foundation of our faith "only Nam-myoho-renge-kyo" (WND-1, 903), that is, to sincerely chant and practice the Mystic Law alone. The second essential message is that "It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 1000). These two points, we agreed, are the crucial cornerstones of the Daishonin's writings.

The reason why the second is important is that faith is not just a matter of embracing the Gohonzon and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but also a matter of our heart, or the attitude with which we practice. Is our heart directed toward kosen-rufu? Our innermost heart, the attitude in the depths of our being, determines everything.

Whether we become happy, attain enlightenment, move in the direction of Buddhahood, or wind up in a state of suffering, everything is the exact result of the wondrous workings of our heart or mind. This point cannot be overemphasized.

Just like us, the universe, too, has a nonmaterial aspect. Our heart of faith is communicated to the universe. The workings of our heart or mind are truly amazing.

Selfishness, complaint, doubt, deviousness, conceit, arrogance, and so forth are all causes of unhappiness for both ourselves and others. When we allow ourselves to be ruled by such negative attitudes, we are like a plane that has lost its direction in a heavy fog. We can see nothing clearly. The distinction between good and bad, right and wrong, becomes blurred. We plunge not only ourselves but our passengers, our friends and others around us, into misery.

When afflicted by arrogance, our minds run amok, like a crazed horse galloping wildly in circles, unable to stop, until we lose all self-awareness and do harm to those around us. This is not a normal human state. And though we may think ourselves better than others, the exact opposite is true. In fact, in Buddhism, the conceited and arrogant are the most dangerous people.

In contrast, a sincere concern for others, a dedicated commitment to our beliefs, a sense of responsibility toward fulfilling our mission for kosen-rufu, a wish to wholeheartedly encourage and support our fellow members, a feeling of appreciation, gratitude, and joy, these attitudes are causes that will produce boundless good fortune, not only for ourselves but also for our family and loved ones as well as our descendants. They give rise to strong protection by the heavenly deities, the positive forces of the universe, and enable us to advance directly along the path to attaining Buddhahood.

Let us therefore live with the Daishonin's words "It is the heart that is important" engraved deeply and indelibly in our lives.

From a speech at a divisional representatives conference, Tokyo, February 25, 1988.

Section 4.2: Appreciation and Joy Multiply Our Good Fortune

Rejecting negativity and practicing faith based on appreciation and joy is the way to elevate our life state.

"It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 1000), writes the Daishonin.

When we do something, do we approach it with a negative attitude, grumbling, "Oh, not again! I hate this!" or a positive attitude, telling ourselves brightly, "All right, here's a fresh opportunity to gain good fortune!"?

This seemingly small, subtle difference in attitude can make a huge difference in our lives. It can change things 180 degrees. This is what the Lotus Sutra and the doctrine of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life," known in Japanese as ichinen-sanzen, teach us.

The heart is invisible, and Buddhism provides a comprehensive understanding of the principles governing that invisible heart. It represents the highest form of psychology, neuroscience, and psychotherapy.

Appreciation and joy multiply our good fortune. Complaint and negativity erase it.

In the endeavor to spread Nichiren Buddhism, actions arising from our sincere wish to help others and teach them the greatness of the Mystic Law bring immense benefit and good fortune to fill our lives.

"It is the heart that is important," there are no truer words than these.

Human beings are weak and easily susceptible to complaint, resentment, envy, and discouragement.

But this is where those who practice Nichiren Buddhism differ. They stop complaining, they stop being dissatisfied and negative. They attain an inner strength that makes them confident and positive. And their hearts overflow with appreciation and gratitude.

We often find that those who live in the city yearn for country life, while those who live in the country long for city life, or that those who are single dream of being married, while those who are married wish they were single again. That is a common tendency of the human heart.

But happiness doesn't lie somewhere far away. It is something we must achieve for ourselves through our present struggles in the here and now.

When we have a positive and appreciative attitude toward our communities, it will give greater confidence and impetus to our activities. The joy of kosen-rufu will spread.

From a speech at a Kyushu and Okinawa joint conference, Okinawa, March 3, 1998.

Note on terminology: "Three thousand realms in a single moment of life," known in Japanese as ichinen-sanzen, is a philosophical system established by the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai of China based on the Lotus Sutra. The "three thousand realms" indicates the varying aspects that life assumes at each moment. At each moment, life manifests one of the Ten Worlds. Each of these worlds possesses the potential for all ten within itself, thus making one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred worlds possesses the ten factors and operates within each of the three realms of existence, thus making three thousand realms. In other words, all phenomena are contained within a single moment of life, and a single moment of life permeates the three thousand realms of existence, or the entire phenomenal world.

Section 4.4: Polishing Our Hearts to Shine like Diamonds

Our hearts will not shine unless we polish them. When we exert ourselves in faith and polish our hearts like diamonds, we attain a state of genuine happiness.

What is the purpose of our Buddhist practice? It is for all of us, without exception, to become happy. That is also the purpose of our organization for kosen-rufu. Those who steadfastly uphold the Mystic Law will never be unhappy. It is important to have absolute confidence in this. That confidence, that conviction, will generate immense good fortune.

Buddhism teaches the four sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death. Our bright, hope-filled members in the Future Division and young men's and young women's divisions will also eventually grow old. The sufferings of sickness and death, too, are inescapable parts of life. Will you lead a life shining with solid happiness, accumulating ever more benefit and good fortune as you grow older? Or will you lead a life characterized by frustration and disappointment, growing sadder and lonelier with the passing years?

The Mystic Law embodies the principle that "the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana." It enables us to be eternally youthful and vibrant, always bringing forth hope and actualizing our dreams.

The Mystic Law embodies the principle that "earthly desires are enlightenment." The more numerous our problems, the more we can expand our life state based on faith and make those problems the fuel for our happiness. We can positively transform everything, changing poison into medicine.

The time of youth, in particular, is fraught with problems and worries. But that's how it should be. You can't become great leaders without experiencing problems or making effort. Through effort and hard work, you strengthen yourself and grow.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 1000).

Those who have diamond-like hearts of faith are radiant champions who enjoy an indestructible, diamond-like state of happiness. They are eternal victors. Wherever they go, wherever they dwell, is a royal palace. They enjoy a vast and lofty state of life, as if gazing serenely over the entire universe.

By contrast, there are those who, though giving the appearance of being fine and upstanding, are actually morally corrupt and dishonest.

We need to polish the diamond of our faith. A raw gemstone only sparkles when it is polished. The diamond of our faith is polished by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and working for kosen-rufu. A life dedicated to the mission of advancing kosen-rufu will unfailingly enter a path of enduring happiness, a wonderful state of constant joy.

Our Buddhist practice enables us to attain a vast and expansive state of life in which we can accept whatever happens with courage and joy, and keep moving positively forward.

From a speech at a Thai commemorative representatives conference, Thailand, February 2, 1992.

Section 4.6: Remaining True to One's Commitment in Faith

President Ikeda stresses the importance of maintaining a sincere spirit in faith, citing the example of the priest Sammi-bo, who though well-versed in Buddhist doctrine succumbed to arrogance and abandoned Nichiren Daishonin's teachings.

Among the Daishonin's disciples was a priest named Sammi-bo, who abandoned his faith during the Daishonin's lifetime.

With his mentor's warm support and understanding, Sammi-bo went to study at Mount Hiei, the site of Enryaku-ji, the main temple of the Tendai school and leading center of Buddhist studies in Japan at the time. During his time there, Sammi-bo wrote to the Daishonin, boastfully reporting that he had been asked to deliver a lecture for court nobles at a private Buddha hall in the imperial capital, Kyoto, and that he had "conducted himself fittingly" (cf. WND-2, 342). The Daishonin responded with a stern rebuke:

"The ruler of Japan is simply the chief of this island country. To speak as you do of being 'summoned' by persons who serve that ruler, of appearing before those 'in high position,' and of conducting yourself 'fittingly' is, however I consider it, in the end an insult to me, Nichiren!" (WND-2, 342-43)

The account that Sammi-bo relayed to his mentor evinced no pride in being his disciple or practicing the supreme teaching of Buddhism. While making a superficial gesture of respecting the Daishonin, in his heart Sammi-bo fawned upon the powerful and, filled with self-importance, looked down on his mentor. He was arrogant, and the Daishonin keenly discerned this.

This is how Sammi-bo acted toward his mentor, who had done so much for him and taught him about the true essence of Buddhism. Sammi-bo was guided by self-interest, not by the teachings of his mentor. He was self-centered.

Arrogance is a form of ingratitude, and ingratitude is an ignorance of life's basic principles. Without such basic understanding, one cannot understand Buddhism. Arrogance, cowardice, and dishonesty, these were Sammi-bo's essential qualities.

The Daishonin added even more sternly:

"It would seem that Nichiren's disciples, after journeying to the capital [Kyoto], at first were careful not to forget their purpose, but later, led astray by the heavenly devil, they lost their senses completely...

"So you [Sammi-bo] have gone to the capital, and before much time has passed you are changing your name [to sound more aristocratic], a piece of utter nonsense." (WND-2, 343)

The heavenly devil, also called the devil king of the sixth heaven, is the king of devils who dwells in the highest of the sixth heaven of the world of desire. He is also named Freely Enjoying Things Conjured by Others, the king who makes free use of the fruits of others' efforts for his own pleasure. Served by innumerable minions, he obstructs Buddhist practice and delights in sapping the life force of other beings, the manifestation of the fundamental darkness or ignorance inherent in life. The devil king is a personification of the negative tendency to force others to one's will at any cost.

The Daishonin laments over the vanity and foolishness of his disciple in moving in court circles, forgetting his original aspiration to seek the Buddha way, adopting a pretentious new name, and even changing his accent:

"No doubt you have also changed your way of speaking and acquired the accent of the capital. Like a mouse that has changed into a bat but in fact is neither bird nor mouse, you are now neither a country priest nor a priest of the capital. You are behaving just like Sho-bo.

"You should just go on speaking like a country person, otherwise you will only sound ridiculous." (WND-2, 343)

Sho-bo was originally a disciple of Nichiren Daishonin, but he abandoned his faith in the Daishonin's teachings around the time of the Izu Exile in 1261 and eventually turned against his mentor. According to one account, he died around 1269.

With this one phrase about acquiring "the accent of the capital," the Daishonin exposed Sammi-bo's inner condition: enthralled by the glamour of the capital, he had been defeated by devilish functions.

Eventually, Sammi-bo renounced faith in the Daishonin's teachings, stopped practicing, and came to a sad end.

The Daishonin's great compassion led him to reflect later: "If I had scolded him [Sammi-bo] more strictly, he might have been saved" (WND-1, 998). As this shows, sternly reprimanding those who succumb to arrogance is the proper approach, which requires firm compassion and accords precisely with the Daishonin's spirit.

The Daishonin boldly declared of himself: "I am merely the son of a commoner from a remote province" (WND-1, 1006). He affirmed that he was not of privileged birth or lineage, but of common birth. He was not ashamed of this, but proud.

Because he was born among the common people, he understood their hearts. If he had been born to privilege or high rank, he would have been shielded by the authorities and never experienced the harsh persecutions that marked his life. As a child of the common people, the Daishonin lived his life among them. He understood their sufferings as if they were his own and propagated his great teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo to relieve those sufferings. Through his own life, he taught and exemplified the true way to realize kosen-rufu for future generations.

Mr. Toda declared that academic background has nothing to do with faith. Of course, he valued learning, but he warned that if individuals who think their education makes them better than others were to become Soka Gakkai leaders, people wouldn't follow them. With such leaders, members would only suffer.

The Daishonin's teachings are just and impartial. He cites the words, "Since the Law is wonderful, the person is worthy of respect" (WND-1, 1097), from T'ien-t'ai's The Words and Phrases of the Lotus Sutra. And he writes: "If the Law that one embraces is supreme, then the person who embraces it must accordingly be foremost among all others" (WND-1, 61).

Important are individuals who work for kosen-rufu. Those who persevere wholeheartedly to spread the Mystic Law in even the most trying times are truly admirable. Graduating from a famous university or having high social status has absolutely nothing to do with faith.

Academic credentials do not define greatness or intelligence. The eyes of Buddhism focus on the people themselves.

From a speech at a Tokyo metropolitan area representatives conference, Tokyo, May 19, 2007.

Section 4.7: When Our Life State Changes, the World around Us Changes

The Buddhist principle of inner transformation means that when we achieve the great life state of Buddhahood, we cause ourselves, those around us, and the place we are to shine.

Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"Hungry spirits perceive the Ganges River as fire, human beings perceive it as water, and heavenly beings perceive it as amrita. Though the water is the same, it appears differently according to one's karmic reward from the past." (WND-1, 486)

Amrita is a legendary, ambrosia-like liquid. In ancient India, it was regarded as the sweet-tasting beverage of the gods. In China, it was thought to rain down from heaven when the world became peaceful. Amrita is said to remove sufferings and give immortality. The word amrita means immortality and is often translated as sweet dew.

How we perceive things differs according to our state of life. When our state of life changes, the realm in which we reside also changes. This is the essence of the doctrine of the "actual three thousand realms in a single moment of life" found in the Lotus Sutra.

The doctrine of three thousand realms in a single moment of life, which is the fundamental teaching for attaining enlightenment, is classified into two as the theoretical principle and the actual embodiment of this principle. These are respectively termed "theoretical three thousand realms in a single moment of life" and "actual three thousand realms in a single moment of life." The theoretical principle is based on the theoretical teaching, or first half, of the Lotus Sutra, while the actual principle is revealed in the essential teaching, or latter half, of the Lotus Sutra. However, in the Latter Day of the Law, these are both theoretical; and the Law of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that Nichiren Daishonin revealed is the actual teaching of three thousand realms in a single moment of life.

Referring to the unending persecution he experienced throughout his life, the Daishonin says:

"Day after day, month after month, year after year I have been subjected to repeated persecutions. Minor persecutions and annoyances are too numerous even to be counted, but the major persecutions number four." (WND-1, 240)

The four major persecutions are: the Matsubagayatsu Persecution of 1260, the Izu Exile of 1261, the Komatsubara Persecution of 1264, and the Tatsunokuchi Persecution and Sado Exile of 1271.

Yet even while exiled to Sado Island, the harshest of his persecutions, he still serenely declares: "I feel immeasurable delight even though I am now an exile" (WND-1, 386). The Daishonin calmly gazes down on his situation from the lofty heights of a life condition as vast and boundless as the universe.

Soka Gakkai founding president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi endured his wartime imprisonment for his beliefs with a similar state of mind, writing in letters from prison: "What I am going through is nothing compared to the sufferings of the Daishonin on Sado"; and "Depending on one's state of mind, even hell can be enjoyable." This last sentence was censored and blacked out by the prosecutor. These quotes come from the Makiguchi Tsunesaburo zenshu, or Collected Writings of Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, volume 10, published in Tokyo by Daisanbunmei-sha in 1987.

Establishing such a towering state of life is the highest aim of humanity.

A single flower can completely transform a bleak atmosphere. The important thing, therefore, is to have the spirit, the determination, to improve your environment, to change it for the better, if even just a little. Especially as practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism striving earnestly in faith, we cannot fail to vibrantly transform our lives. We will definitely enjoy happiness and prosperity. This is an unchanging principle of Buddhism.

Our attitude changes everything. This is one of the great wonders of life, and at the same time, an undeniable reality.

A proverb says: "Do not complain that the rosebush has thorns, but rejoice that the thornbush has roses." Our perception changes depending on our outlook, becoming bright, beautiful, and expansive.

Nichiren Daishonin speaks of the "wonderful workings of one mind" (OTT, 30). The focused mind of faith in the Gohonzon has power and functions that are truly immense and wondrous. When the fundamental engine of our "one mind," our inner attitude, or resolve, starts running, the gears of all phenomena of the three thousand realms are set in motion. Everything starts to change. We move everything in a bright and positive direction.

When embraced by the great life state of Buddhahood, we ourselves, those around us, and the land in which we live will all shine with the light of happiness and hope. This is the power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo of the "actual three thousand realms in a single moment of life." At work here is the Buddhist principle of dynamic transformation.

From Lectures on the "Expedient Means" and "Life Span" Chapters of the Lotus Sutra, volume 3, published in Japanese in June 1996.

Section 4.8: Devoting Ourselves to Our Mission

Devoting ourselves to our mission in our daily lives is the way to embody the principle that "It is the heart that is important."

In life, not everything goes the way we hope from the very beginning. There are often cases where, for various reasons, we have to spend long periods of our lives in places we would rather not be. How do we deal with this? How do we lead a life of satisfaction and victory in a way that is true to ourselves in such situations? That is the challenge.

All too many respond to those kinds of circumstances by bewailing their misfortune, resenting their environment and the people in it to the end of their days. There are countless people like this in the world. There are also people who are driven to seek worldly success and honor and the praise and admiration of others. As long as such things remain their sole goals in life, they are bound to suffer endless dissatisfaction and anxiety.

Desire has no limits, and as long as selfishness prevails, it is impossible to satisfy everyone. Not everyone in a company can be president.

Of course, it's natural to make efforts to change and improve our environment and circumstances. But it's even more essential that we resolutely protect where we are now, our own "fortress," or home ground, so to speak. We need to dedicate ourselves to our mission and, in that capacity, create a solid record of achievement in our own unique way.

Some people are never in the limelight, never in a position to receive praise and recognition from others. But "It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 1000). A person's greatness is not determined by social status. Our happiness isn't determined by our environment. A vast universe exists in our hearts, in our lives. We practice Nichiren Buddhism to open up that boundless inner realm.

When we open that magnificent realm of the spirit, we will be champions wherever we might be. We will savor without end the wondrous delights of a truly profound existence.

Many people seek success and importance in the eyes of the world, but few aspire to become truly great human beings. Many wish to be showered with praise and attention, but few strive to build an inner happiness that will remain undiminished until the moment of their death and extend throughout the three existences of past, present, and future.

Death is the great final accounting of a person's life. Fame, wealth, social position, learning, these in themselves are of no avail in the face of death. Death is a struggle faced with nothing but one's life itself, stripped of all worldly trappings. It is a solemn moment, at which victory or defeat is impartially determined. Those who win in this struggle are true victors.

Our greatness and happiness as human beings are determined by the strength of our life force and our Buddhist faith and practice dedicated to kosen-rufu.

We are striving day after day for kosen-rufu, an unprecedented ideal in the history of humankind. It requires incredible perseverance and effort. Yet because of that, we are absolutely certain to build lives of true fulfillment.

How others view us is not important. Temporary successes or failures also do not matter. What counts is whether our faces shine with happy smiles at the very end of our lives. If we can look back and say, "My life was victorious. It was enjoyable. I have no regrets," then we are victors.

You, my friends in the youth division in particular, may now find yourselves in extremely trying and challenging situations. It may seem that impressive honors are beyond your reach. But that's fine. Just keep striving your hardest to realize your ideals, in the place of your personal mission. That's the way to build an eternally indestructible "fortress" of victory within your heart.

From a speech at a leaders meeting, Tokyo, November 12, 1989.

Section 4.10: Cultivating a Lofty Life State Imbued with the Four Virtues

Those who dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law can attain a completely unshakable life state of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity. To do so, it is crucial to develop a deep faith that cannot be defeated by karma or adversity.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin states: "When, while in these four states of birth, aging, sickness, and death, we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we cause them to waft forth the fragrance of the four virtues" (OTT, 90).

The four virtues, or four noble qualities of the Buddha's life, eternity, happiness, true self, and purity, refer to the supreme state we can attain as human beings, a state of absolute freedom and happiness.

"True self" refers to a state of freedom as vast as the universe, in which we can enjoy our true, or greater, self.

"Eternity" refers to the dynamism of life that is ceaselessly renewing itself, the creative evolution of life that breaks through all stagnation.

"Purity" refers to the activity of purifying the narrow egoism of our lesser self through the powerful life force of our greater self.

And "happiness" refers to the joy of life as it pulses dynamically from moment to moment; it also corresponds to having a fully rounded character that imparts joy to all around us.

In this way, a person's character, when illuminated by the Mystic Law, will be firmly grounded in the "greater self," a state of boundless freedom that pervades the entire universe, qualitatively transforming even the energy of earthly desires focused on the egotistic "lesser self." In other words, the energy of earthly desires can be elevated and transformed into shining wisdom and compassion; it can be powerfully redirected to a higher level that transcends the individual and benefits others, the community, and society in general.

This is the Buddhist principle that "earthly desires are enlightenment." It opens wide a brilliant path by which we can strive for our own perfection along with that of others, while actively working to build an ideal society.

What are the ingredients for happiness? This is one of life's fundamental questions.

The most crucial determinant for happiness is our own inner state of life.

Those with an expansive inner state of being are happy. They live out their days with an open and confident spirit.

People with a strong state of life are happy. They are not defeated by suffering, and can calmly enjoy life as it unfolds.

Those with a profound state of life are happy. Savoring the deep significance of life, they are able to create a record of meaningful and enduring value.

People with a pure state of life are happy. They are always spreading refreshing joy to those around them.

There are countless individuals who are blessed with wealth, social status, and other material advantages, but are unhappy. And such external circumstances are changeable and impermanent; no one knows how long they will last.

But when you have established an unshakable inner state of happiness, no one can destroy it. Nothing can violate it. Creating this great life state is the aim of your Buddhist practice. The important thing is to never stray from the Gohonzon, to never stop advancing in faith.

In the course of life, you are bound to face all kinds of difficulties. At times, you may become stuck. That is when you need to strengthen your faith and chant daimoku in earnest. Difficult as it might be, once you surmount the steep mountain of your karma, a new horizon will open wide before you. Buddhist practice is the repetition of this process. Eventually, you will reach a state of absolute happiness that will never be destroyed.

Develop deep, strongly rooted faith. As long as a sapling has strong roots, and receives enough sunshine and water, it will grow into a tall, sturdy tree, even if it is buffeted by the elements. The same is true of our Buddhist practice and our lives. I hope that all of you will be courageous individuals who cheerfully spread the great light of happiness throughout this troubled world, your lives serving as personal proof of the true greatness of Nichiren Buddhism.

From a speech at an SGI-Europe general meeting, UK, May 28, 1989.
