Chapter 14: "Be Good Citizens!"

Section 14.1: Buddhism Teaches How to Live as a Human Being

"Be good citizens!"—this is an eternal guideline that President Ikeda has consistently articulated.

The Soka Gakkai's aim is to develop a wonderful network of good citizens—people of character and integrity who contribute to society while fulfilling their precious missions in their own unique way.

The good citizenship that President Ikeda emphasizes is synonymous with global citizenship. When President Ikeda signed the attendance book at the meeting announcing the Soka Gakkai International's founding in Guam on January 26, 1975, he wrote "World" as his nationality. The Soka Gakkai is a proud gathering of global citizens, transcending ethnic and national differences, who work together at the grass roots as fellow human beings for the happiness of all people.

This chapter presents selections of President Ikeda's guidance on the importance of good citizenship and global citizenship.

In this first selection, he emphasizes that Buddhism is a teaching for daily life, and does not exist apart from human life and society.

In "The Three Kinds of Treasure," Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"The heart of the Buddha's lifetime of teachings is the Lotus Sutra, and the heart of the practice of the Lotus Sutra is found in the '[Bodhisattva] Never Disparaging' chapter. What does Bodhisattva Never Disparaging's profound respect for people signify? The purpose of the appearance in this world of Shakyamuni Buddha, the lord of teachings, lies in his behavior as a human being." (WND-1, 851–52)

This is a passage from a letter the Daishonin wrote to his disciple Shijo Kingo in September 1277. At the time, the latter found himself in a dire situation, having angered his feudal lord, Ema, by trying to convert him to the Daishonin's teachings. Ema fell seriously ill a short time later, and called on Shijo Kingo, who was well-versed in medicine, to treat him. Shijo Kingo was able to regain the favor of his lord as a result, but this provoked the jealousy of his fellow samurai, placing his life in danger.

In this letter, the Daishonin expresses heartfelt concern for the welfare of his disciple, whom he knew to be hot-tempered, and urges him to exercise all the more self-control and act with caution. This is an example of the Daishonin's warm and encompassing spirit to embrace everyone and do absolutely everything he could to help them become happy. There is nothing authoritarian in his words. Addressing Shijo Kingo's weak points, he offers caring and detailed advice to prevent his disciple from making a grave mistake and bringing about his own ruin.

We can easily imagine how the Daishonin's deeply compassionate encouragement must have calmed Shijo Kingo down and broadened his perspective.

The behavior of Bodhisattva Never Disparaging is described in the chapter of the Lotus Sutra bearing his name. No matter how people despised and attacked him, Bodhisattva Never Disparaging was never angered or resentful. Even when he encountered people of overbearing arrogance, he continued to respectfully acknowledge their Buddha nature.

The Daishonin refers to the behavior of Bodhisattva Never Disparaging in his letter to warn Shijo Kingo not to let his short temper cause him to speak or behave rashly, but instead to be discreet and act wisely. He concludes his advice by stating that the reason for Shakyamuni's appearance in the world was to teach us how to behave as human beings.

Buddhism is ultimately a teaching about human life and conduct. In that sense, our Buddhist practice is expressed in our words and actions. The important thing is how we lead our lives in society, how we conduct ourselves each day, based on faith in the Mystic Law. Each of those actions helps pave the way for our attainment of Buddhahood.

There is a famous passage in the Daishonin's treatise "On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land": "You have associated with a friend in the orchid room and have become as straight as mugwort growing among hemp" (WND-1, 23).

An "orchid room" is a room filled with sweet-smelling orchids. Just as one who dwells in such a room will gradually be imbued with the fragrance of the orchids, those who associate with people of outstanding character who believe in the correct teaching of Buddhism will eventually be awakened to the validity of that teaching themselves. "Associate" here means to actually come into contact with their words and behavior.

In this treatise the host (Nichiren Daishonin) presents the correct teaching to a visiting guest. When the guest reacts emotionally, becoming enraged, the host remains unperturbed. When the guest is about to storm away angrily, the host smiles soothingly, urges him to stay, and continues patiently to explain the correct teaching.

Influenced by the host's actions, which embody compassion and reason, as well as the "fragrance" of his noble character, the guest gradually begins to open his heart. In the end, he discards his attachment to erroneous views and seeks the correct teaching. Reading this treatise is like watching a drama of dialogue unfold before our eyes.

Buddhism doesn't exist apart from the reality of society, or from people and their lives. No matter how valid the teachings of Buddhism may be, just loudly proclaiming that fact will not persuade people. If anything, that approach is quite likely to drive them away from the path of Buddhism, and that would be going against the intent of the Daishonin, who entrusted us with the mission of realizing kosen-rufu.

When we try to help people gain an understanding of the greatness of Nichiren Buddhism, the first thing they look at is our daily behavior. How do we live our lives? Are we people of character and integrity? People observe us very closely. If we are careless about money matters or lack good judgment, if we behave in an arrogant, conceited manner, then, irrespective of how wonderful this Buddhism is, people will not believe us.

Winning people's trust and understanding is very important. Buddhism teaches that when we uphold the supreme Law, we can come to shine as people of unsurpassed character.

We of the Soka Gakkai have widely spread understanding of Nichiren Buddhism while polishing our own humanity so that it shines brightly. We have made efforts to be the "friends in the orchid room" to people in society.

It is by developing our humanity through our Buddhist practice—cultivating unshakable conviction, hope for the future, warm concern for others, rich wisdom, passion for our mission, and an expansive, all-embracing state of life—that we will inspire others and open their hearts to our message.

From a speech at an Okinawa Prefecture executive conference, Okinawa, February 8, 1991.

Section 14.2: Be People Who Shine through Their Behavior

President Ikeda explains that by winning the trust of others through our behavior as human beings, we can show wonderful actual proof of the greatness of Buddhism.

President Makiguchi often used to say: "There are three kinds of people in the world—those everyone wants to have around, those whose presence or absence doesn't make a difference, and those whose presence causes problems. Always try to be the kind of person that others want to have around, both in your home and your workplace."

Becoming people who are trusted, respected, and liked by all—indispensable people who are needed at home, at work, and in our community—is the way to show the validity of our Buddhist practice and advance our movement for kosen-rufu.

In a letter to his disciple Shijo Kingo, Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Live so that all the people of Kamakura will say in your praise that Nakatsukasa Saburo Saemon-no-jo [Shijo Kingo] is diligent in the service of his lord, in the service of Buddhism, and in his concern for other people" (WND-1, 851).

At the time, Shijo Kingo was facing considerable hardship. Envious colleagues had made false accusations about him to his lord, who responded by confiscating some of his estates. The Daishonin advised Shijo Kingo that instead of bemoaning his situation, he should work on developing himself and strive to grow as a human being. This, he explained, was the most genuine and noble way for a person to live and the path that a Buddhist practitioner should take.

Even if we are subjected to unfounded criticism or attack, we should remain undisturbed and keep living our lives in the right way. By doing so, we will win the praise and respect of others in the end.

It is in our behavior as human beings that the teachings of Buddhism come alive and actual proof of our Buddhist practice is revealed. Our courteous, humane conduct can be said to be an expression of correct faith.

In addition to being good practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism, I hope you will also be good neighbors, good citizens, and good members of your local community and society. May you win the praise, respect, and trust of others through such behavior. Spreading circles of bright, deep, ever-widening trust and understanding is the key to expanding our movement for kosen-rufu.

From a speech at a Rio de Janeiro representatives conference, Brazil, February 10, 1993.

Section 14.3: Being Responsible, Good Citizens

Speaking to members in Sweden, President Ikeda outlines the fundamental spirit for practicing Nichiren Buddhism—being considerate of one's neighbors, respecting the culture and customs of the land in which one lives, and spreading Buddhism at a steady, unhurried pace.

As this is my first visit to Sweden, I would like to offer my thoughts on some basic points.

First, I hope you will show care for your neighbors. We do not live in isolation; we exist as members of a community. We need to be considerate of one another. That is just common sense. If we simply assert our own rights or what suits our convenience, we are not responsible members of society.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Buddhism is reason" (WND-1, 839). As Soka Gakkai members, who uphold the Daishonin's teachings, it's important that we be reasonable and show sound judgment.

I hope you will not only be considerate of and courteous to your own neighbors, but also those of this community center where many members gather. When you see the local residents, please offer them a bright and pleasant greeting. I hope you will take utmost care not to bother or inconvenience anyone or make them feel uneasy. Through continuing such sincere efforts, you are sure to eventually spread understanding of Nichiren Buddhism and make this center a true citadel of happiness in the community.

Fostering mutual trust as fellow human beings is important. Never be self-righteous. Remember that the flow of kosen-rufu in the community is secured by reassuring people and winning their praise and admiration through your exemplary behavior as practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism.

If, on the other hand, you never greet the residents living near the center and then disturb them by making lots of noise late at night or early in the morning—noise from ringing phones, people entering and leaving the center, or cars and motorcycles arriving and departing—you are breaking the rules of good-neighborliness. I hope you will also take care not to talk loudly on the streets outside or near the center, or thoughtlessly litter the area with cigarette butts and other trash.

No matter how fine your words or meaningful your activities, it is by such very ordinary behavior that people judge you. This is true everywhere. Such failings in the past have seriously hampered the progress of kosen-rufu.

In Buddhism, the term "sutra" (Japanese: kyo) means scripture or teaching. In a broader sense, it means that which expresses the lives of all living beings—that is, all our words and actions. We are each "reciting" our own sutra through our own words and actions.

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, in this sense, is the supreme sutra. As those who embrace this highest sutra, we must strive as much as we can to improve and refine our words and actions.

As for the second point, I hope you will respect the culture and customs of the land in which you live.

The Buddhism of Nichiren Daishonin encompasses the entire universe and equally illuminates the lives of all people. It is not a Japanese religion, but a religion for all humankind. There's no need for us, therefore, as practitioners of the Mystic Law, to cling to Japanese culture, ways of thinking, or language.

Of course, we must remain strict about the basics of faith and practice, but Sweden has its own culture and traditions, its own customs and practices that have evolved over the course of its history. As long as such traditions and customs do not contradict the essential teachings of Buddhism, it is only natural for you as Swedish members to value that heritage. To quarrel or give the impression of being rigid or narrow-minded about such matters in fact runs counter to the tolerant, broad-minded spirit of Nichiren Buddhism.

I hope that while basing yourselves on the Daishonin's teachings, you will all be good citizens who abide by the laws and customs of the land in which you live and win the trust and acceptance of everyone around you.

The third point I wish to share is not to be impatient in spreading Buddhism.

The Buddhism of Nichiren Daishonin is the Buddhism of sowing implicit in the Lotus Sutra. The foundation of our practice is chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves and reaching out to interact with others to bring them into contact with the Mystic Law. Whether they start practicing or not is a separate issue. There are two ways the seeds of the Law can be planted: "sowing the seeds by letting people hear the teaching," which means to enable others to hear about Buddhism, and "sowing the seeds by leading people to arouse faith in the teaching," which means enabling them to accept and have faith in the Gohonzon. Both are equally excellent forms of propagation. They both produce the same benefits.

Note on terminology: The Buddhism of sowing indicates the Buddhism of Nichiren, which plants the seeds of Buddhahood, or the cause for attaining Buddhahood, in people's lives. In contrast with Shakyamuni's Buddhism, which is called the Buddhism of the harvest and can only lead to enlightenment those who received the seeds of Buddhahood in previous lifetimes, the Buddhism of sowing implants the seeds of Buddhahood in the lives of those who had no connection with the Buddha's teaching in their past existences—that is, the people of the Latter Day of the Law.

The majority of the world's people as yet know nothing of the teachings, or even the name, of Nichiren Buddhism. Our mission is to sow the seeds of the Mystic Law—in other words, the seeds for peace and happiness—in their lives. In most cases, by simply interacting with others as true friends and communicating sincerely and openly, we will help them form a connection with Buddhism. It is also important that we continue to pray for the happiness of those individuals. Later, we may have an opportunity to talk to them in a very natural way about our Buddhism of sowing.

But never get into arguments over faith or be persistent to the point where you both end up getting angry and upset. Just continue to cherish your sincere wish that the other person will accept this Buddhism. There is no need to be impatient or feel pressured to get someone to start practicing. Once you have helped someone form a connection with Buddhism, the time will surely come when the seed you have planted will sprout and blossom.

From a speech at the opening of the Swedish Culture Center, Sweden, June 3, 1989.

Section 14.4: Kosen-rufu Starts from Actions in Daily Life

President Ikeda stresses that our human revolution takes place not on some distant stage, but is based on our everyday actions and behavior, and in our compassionate, caring interactions with those in our lives.

The French philosopher Voltaire wrote of happiness: "Be wise for your own sake. Be compassionate toward your fellow men. Build your happiness through the happiness of others."

"Build your happiness through the happiness of others"—these are profound words, words that resonate with our Buddhist practice of striving for the happiness of both ourselves and others. True happiness cannot be found in the egoism of pursuing one's own happiness alone. Only in sincere practice motivated by a wish for the happiness of others can we attain our own happiness, which is why such action is the wisest course for ourselves as well.

Nothing is more important than our everyday efforts and conduct. This is where our true humanity shines.

And Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Voltaire's contemporary, said: "Distrust those cosmopolitans who search out remote duties in their books and neglect those that lie nearest." This is from Emile, or, On Education.

Deep philosophical discussions are fine, and high ideals are important. Inspiring lectures on the Daishonin's writings certainly have their role. But we must never become hollow ideologues who make fine speeches about love for humanity while failing to cherish those around us. People who shirk hard work and are intoxicated by their own lofty rhetoric may have a high opinion of themselves, but they are, in fact, far from admirable.

It is easy to be attracted to abstract ideals, but difficult to challenge the realities of daily life. I hope that while upholding the magnificent ideal of kosen-rufu, you will spend your days in the actual practice of encouraging and motivating one person and then another and another to contribute to kosen-rufu. This is the practice, the hard work, of propagating the Mystic Law in the real world.

From a speech at a student division summer training course, Shizuoka, July 21, 1987.

Section 14.5: Buddhism Manifests Itself in Society

In this scene from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) attends a February 1977 meeting of the Soka Gakkai's Business Professionals Division, and describes the fundamental approach that practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism should adopt.

Shin'ichi emphasized that kosen-rufu starts with establishing a firm foundation in one's own life: "Practically speaking, though it may sound very mundane, establishing a firm foundation begins with your own health. As an individual and a member of society, your most precious possession is your life. That's why I urge you to please take good care of your health. Looking after our health and taking steps to prevent illness reflect the wisdom of our Buddhist practice."

Maintaining good health is an important requirement for being victorious in society. When we're filled with vitality and high spirits, we can strive our hardest and play a truly positive and productive role in our workplace.

Buddhism is based on reason. If we overeat, drink too much, don't get enough sleep, and work too hard, we'll eventually feel the ill effects of that behavior, become sick, or cause an accident. To prevent that from happening, we need to act wisely and lead a sound, value-creating life. That is the way of genuine practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism.

It's vital to lead healthy, well-balanced lives, carry out a refreshing and invigorating daily practice of gongyo, and do our best at work and in our communities, brimming with energy and vitality.

Shin'ichi then spoke about the importance of family. When our family life is stable, we can bring forth our fullest potential in the workplace. Happiness is ultimately found close to home, in our relationships with our family and loved ones. What we teach our children at home also plays a very important role in fostering successors in faith. To create strong and happy families is to build bright beacons that light the way for kosen-rufu in the community.

Next, Shin'ichi turned to the correct Buddhist attitude in striving for success at work: "To excel at our jobs, we need to completely discard the idea that everything will just fall into place because we are practicing Nichiren Buddhism. That's a misguided way of thinking, a form of arrogance that goes against the Daishonin's teaching that we should regard our work as our Buddhist practice. Always remember that correct faith means having utmost wisdom and common sense."

Buddhism is a way of life. Winning the trust of those around us and demonstrating proof of victory in our workplaces leads directly to victory in our lives and in Buddhism. That's why it's important to play a vibrant and active role in our workplaces and communities.

Warmly encouraging the members present, Shin'ichi continued: "In society, we have to interact with all kinds of people, and sometimes even attend the observances of other religions. We mustn't be narrow-minded or close ourselves off. Instead, we should be wise and broad-minded, reaching out to form friendly ties with others. Nichiren Buddhism is a religion that exists for people's happiness.

"We mustn't wall ourselves off from society or become insular and intolerant because of our faith. Nor is there ever any need to get into arguments at home or at work about our Buddhist faith. That's completely counterproductive. As practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism, it's more valuable to take a long-term perspective, being warmly supportive of our family members and coworkers and doing what we can to help them become happy."

Over the centuries, there have been a number of Nichiren Buddhist groups that have been seen as extremist and prone to exclusionary and self-righteous behavior. In fact, before World War II, groups claiming to champion the ideals of Nichiren Buddhism committed acts of violence. This is an intolerable affront to the lofty spirit of Nichiren Daishonin, who regarded all individuals as possessing the Buddha nature and sought happiness for all. It represents a failure to understand that Buddhists should behave as responsible members of their society, as indicated by the principle that "Buddhism manifests itself in society."

In closing, Shin'ichi emphasized the importance of common sense: "Members who incur the disdain of those around them through their extreme words and actions have one thing in common. They tend to be people who have 'faith like fire'—exerting themselves in their practice with passion and a great show of enthusiasm for a brief moment, but soon discarding it. The key to faith lies in continuing—as the Daishonin affirms when he says: 'To accept is easy; to continue is difficult. But Buddhahood lies in continuing faith' (WND-1, 471).

"Kosen-rufu is realized gradually through our steady, persistent efforts to spread our network of trust in our workplaces and communities. In other words, behavior based on common sense is the essence of faith."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 24, "Beacon" chapter.

Section 14.7: The "Greater Self" of the Bodhisattva Way

President Ikeda clarifies that to be a good citizen is to practice the bodhisattva way, transcending the small self of the ego and basing one's life and actions on one's greater self. In this excerpt from one of his peace proposals, he elaborates on this point, referring to the speech he made on the occasion of the SGI's establishment.

My point in introducing the concept of the bodhisattva is this: Human rights will only become truly universal and indivisible when they span the most basic, existential division—that of self and other. And this can only occur when both the right to, and duty of humane treatment are observed, not in response to externally imposed norms, but through spontaneous action stemming from the naturally powerful desire to assist our fellows whose ability to live in a humane manner is under threat.

Twenty-three years ago (on January 26, 1975), I appealed to members of the newly formed SGI, saying: "Rather than seeking after your own praise or glory, I hope that you will dedicate your noble lives to sowing the seeds of peace of the Mystic Law throughout the entire world." Just as unhappiness is not something only others suffer, neither can happiness be for ourselves only. In this sense, my appeal was a cry from the depths of my heart that we should live the bodhisattva way of life: overcoming the small self of the ego, developing an extended, more inclusive, "greater self"—seeing ourselves in others and feeling others to be part of ourselves.

As good citizens of their respective societies, the members of the SGI are working to advance a movement for peace, culture, and education. In the immediate context of their daily lives, they act with the bodhisattva spirit, refusing to ignore or abandon those who are suffering. They initiate and carry out countless acts for the benefit of others, striving to encourage this person, to relieve the anguish of that person, and to help those around them. I am proud of them and believe theirs are the kind of quiet, grassroots endeavors that will certainly help create the human rights culture that our times demand. It is my belief that if we can foster, in the depths of each individual human life, the kind of active, independent basis for altruistic behavior exemplified in the bodhisattva's vow, we can establish the fundamental foundation for an ethic of responsibility and commitment upon which a genuine culture of human rights can flourish.

From a peace proposal commemorating the 23rd SGI Day, January 26, 1998.

Section 14.8: The Qualities of Global Citizens

To be a good citizen of our country is to be a global citizen. Here, President Ikeda discusses three essential elements of global citizenship—wisdom, courage, and compassion—and shines a light on the bodhisattva way of life that opposes divisiveness and aims for harmonious coexistence and unity.

What are the conditions for global citizenship?

Over the past several decades, I have been privileged to meet and converse with many people from all walks of life, and I have given the matter some thought. Certainly, global citizenship is not determined merely by the number of languages one speaks, or the number of countries to which one has traveled. I have many friends who could be considered quite ordinary citizens, but who possess an inner nobility; who have never traveled beyond their native place, yet who are genuinely concerned for the peace and prosperity of the world.

I think I can state with confidence that the following are essential elements of global citizenship:

The wisdom to perceive the interconnectedness of all life.

The courage not to fear or deny difference, but to respect and strive to understand people of different cultures, and to grow from encounters with them.

The compassion to maintain an imaginative empathy that reaches beyond one's immediate surroundings and extends to those suffering in distant places.

The all-encompassing interrelatedness that forms the core of the Buddhist worldview can provide a basis, I feel, for the concrete realization of these qualities of wisdom, courage, and compassion. The following parable from the Buddhist canon provides a beautiful visual metaphor for the interdependence and interpenetration of all phenomena.

Suspended above the palace of Indra, the Buddhist god who symbolizes the natural forces that protect and nurture life, is an enormous net. A brilliant jewel is attached to each of the knots of the net. Each jewel contains and reflects the image of all the other jewels in the net, which sparkles in the magnificence of its totality.

When we learn to recognize what Henry David Thoreau referred to as "the infinite extent of our relations," we can trace the strands of mutually supportive life, and discover there the glittering jewels of our global neighbors. This is from Walden.

Buddhism seeks to cultivate wisdom grounded in this kind of empathetic resonance with all forms of life. In the Buddhist view, wisdom and compassion are intimately linked and mutually reinforcing. Compassion in Buddhism does not involve the forcible suppression of our natural emotions, our likes and dislikes. Rather, it is the realization that even those we dislike have qualities that can contribute to our lives, and can afford us the opportunity to grow in our own humanity. Further, it is the compassionate desire to find ways of contributing to the well-being of others that gives rise to limitless wisdom.

Buddhism teaches that both good and evil are potentialities that exist in all people. Compassion consists in the sustained and courageous effort to seek out the good in any person, whoever they may be, however they may behave. It means striving, through sustained engagement, to cultivate the positive qualities in oneself and in others. Engagement, however, requires courage. There are all too many cases in which compassion, owing to a lack of courage, remains mere sentiment. Buddhism calls a person who embodies these qualities of wisdom, courage, and compassion, who strives without cease for the happiness of others, a bodhisattva. In this sense, it could be said that the bodhisattva provides an ancient precedent and modern exemplar of the global citizen.

The Buddhist canon also includes the story of a contemporary of Shakyamuni, a woman by the name of Shrimala, who dedicated herself to education, teaching others that the practice of the bodhisattva consists in encouraging, with maternal care, the ultimate potential for good within all people. Her vow is recorded thus: If I see lonely people, people who have been jailed unjustly and have lost their freedom, people who are suffering from illness, disaster or poverty, I will not abandon them. I will bring them spiritual and material comfort.

In concrete terms, her practice consisted of the following:

Encouraging others by addressing them with kindness and concern, through dialogue (Sanskrit: priyavacana).

Giving alms, or providing people with the things they require (Sanskrit: dana).

Taking action on behalf of others (Sanskrit: artha-carya).

Joining with others, and working together with them (Sanskrit: samanartha).

Through these efforts, Shrimala sought to realize her goal of bringing forth the positive aspects of those she encountered.

The practice of the bodhisattva is supported by a profound faith in the inherent goodness of people. Knowledge must be directed to the task of unleashing this creative, positive potential. This purposefulness can be likened to the skill that enables one to make use of the precision instruments of an airplane to reach a destination safely and without incident. For this reason, the insight to perceive the evil that causes destruction and divisiveness, and that is equally part of human nature, is also necessary. The bodhisattva's practice is an unshrinking confrontation with what Buddhism calls the fundamental ignorance.

Note on terminology: Fundamental ignorance is the most deeply rooted illusion inherent in life, said to give rise to all other illusions. It is the inability to see or recognize the truth, particularly, the true nature of one's life.

"Goodness" can be defined as that which moves us in the direction of harmonious coexistence, empathy, and solidarity with others. The nature of evil, on the other hand, is to divide: people from people, humanity from the rest of nature. The pathology of divisiveness drives people to an unreasoning attachment to difference and blinds them to human commonalities. This is not limited to individuals, but constitutes the deep psychology of collective egoism, which takes its most destructive form in virulent strains of ethnocentrism and nationalism. The struggle to rise above such egoism and live in larger and more contributive realms of selfhood constitutes the core of the bodhisattva's practice.

From a lecture at Columbia University Teachers College, "Thoughts on Education for Global Citizenship," U.S.A., June 13, 1996.

Section 14.9: Leading Noble Lives as Global Citizens

Looking back on an exchange with then Club of Rome President Ricardo Diez-Hochleitner, President Ikeda explains what true global citizenship means.

Dr. Diez-Hochleitner and I have discussed the concept of global citizenship at length. He once remarked: "A good world citizen must start by being a good family member, a good fellow worker or professional, and a good member of the local community. Starting with fundamentals of this kind has a great impact on deep reform; this relates to your idea that a single individual can change the environment, region, nation and even the whole world." This is from the dialogue book A Dialogue Between East and West: Looking to a Human Revolution.

This is an important observation.

Our organization has advanced under the motto "Be good citizens." Furthermore, it upholds "faith for a harmonious family" among its eternal guidelines.

Becoming a global citizen begins nowhere else but within one's family, workplace, and community. Let us confirm once again that it is our sure and steady efforts in these areas that form the first steps toward any lasting reform. Wherever we find ourselves at the present moment, that is the place to rise into action, burning with commitment, passion, and hope. When we ourselves move forward with new vitality as if totally rejuvenated, our local organizations and communities will likewise begin to achieve fresh and dynamic growth.

We can create a proud record of accomplishment in life by positively advancing kosen-rufu through sharing Buddhism with those around us, and by striving to help others as we make our way together along the path of happiness.

From a speech at a Tokyo Number 2 Area executive conference, Tokyo, November 18, 2005.
