Chapter 12: Transforming Karma into Mission

Section 12.1: The Principle of "Voluntarily Assuming the Appropriate Karma"

President Ikeda constantly urges us to lead lives of vigorous human revolution, transforming karma into mission.

Everyone faces unexpected challenges in life. But when we have the positive attitude that we can transform karma into mission, then life's winters will always give way to spring—or rather, we will be able to experience life's winters, just as they are, as spring.

For what purpose will we use our precious lives? From the moment we awaken deeply to our mission, the drama of changing our karma and accomplishing our human revolution begins to unfold on a grand scale.

In this selection, through the principle of "voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma" taught in the Lotus Sutra, President Ikeda explains that, regardless of the adversities we may encounter in life, when we base ourselves on the Mystic Law, we can transform all negative karma into our mission.

My mentor, second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda, said: "Suffering is a part of life. Without suffering, we wouldn't be able to savor true enjoyment or pleasure. When we fully grasp this, being alive in itself becomes enjoyable. That is the ultimate purpose of our Buddhist practice."

He also said: "Any organization or group, as it grows, will experience various problems and mishaps. This is inevitable. But the power of the Mystic Law enables us to solve such issues and ensure that our organization continues to develop. This is the way of value creation."

The driving force for changing suffering into joy and adversity into the energy for dynamic development is our Buddhist practice and Soka Gakkai activities.

The more challenging the obstacles we overcome, the more dramatically we can transform our karma and the bigger, better people we can become.

Day after day, many people share with me that they have come to enjoy good health and well-being through practicing Nichiren Buddhism. Nothing makes me happier.

Mr. Toda encouraged a member suffering from illness: "When you trip over a stone and fall, you place your hands on the ground and push yourself up again. In the same way, please transform your karma of illness into mission and overcome it through practicing Nichiren Buddhism."

He also said: "The Lotus Sutra teaches that the Buddha, too, suffered from sickness. In one of his commentaries, the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai says that all living beings are subject to illness, so it would be difficult to relate to the Buddha if he didn't also experience illness."

The Lotus Sutra teaches the principle of "voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma." Bodhisattvas vow to free people from suffering, and to fulfill their vow they deliberately choose to be born into this world of suffering and evil (cf. LSOC10, 200, 202).

When we base our lives on faith in the Mystic Law, we can always change our karma into mission, however daunting the problems we face.

In the Soka Gakkai, we have fellow members we can strive together with. We have encouragement and hope. The vibrant heart-to-heart interaction we share is a truly wonderful source of vitality for living long, healthy and fulfilling lives.

The Soka Gakkai is an unsurpassed haven of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity.

From a speech at a Yamanashi Prefecture executive conference, Yamanashi, September 3, 2006.

Note on terminology: "Voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma" refers to bodhisattvas who, though qualified to receive the pure rewards of Buddhist practice, relinquish them and make a vow to be reborn in an impure world in order to save living beings. They spread the Mystic Law, while undergoing the same sufferings as those born in the evil world due to karma. This term derives from Miao-lo's interpretation of relevant passages in "The Teacher of the Law" (10th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra.

Section 12.2: Fulfilling Our Vow as Bodhisattvas of the Earth

Speaking to youth division members, President Ikeda says that awakening to our mission as Bodhisattvas of the Earth, who vow to realize kosen-rufu in the Latter Day of the Law and boldly take action toward that end, is to understand the innermost essence of our lives.

In "The True Aspect of All Phenomena," Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Were they not Bodhisattvas of the Earth, they could not chant the daimoku [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo]" (WND-1, 385). Being able to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is in itself proof of a deep karmic connection from the past.

The Daishonin also writes: "If you are of the same mind as Nichiren, you must be a Bodhisattva of the Earth" (WND-1, 385). Young people who dedicate their lives to kosen-rufu and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo are all supremely respectworthy Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

You are chanting daimoku for the happiness of others and the realization of kosen-rufu. You are engaging in Soka Gakkai activities and striving to share Nichiren Buddhism with those around you. Such prayers and actions are themselves expressions of your vow for kosen-rufu.

In the "Emerging from the Earth" (15th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra, the Bodhisattvas of the Earth emerge from beneath the earth and vow to propagate the Lotus Sutra in the Latter Day of the Law. In accord with that vow, we have been born in this world and are working for the sake of kosen-rufu as Soka Gakkai members. We are deeply and strongly connected to one another through our prayers based on our shared vow.

The Soka Gakkai is an organization carrying out the Buddha's intent, its members standing up with an awareness of their mission as Bodhisattvas of the Earth. How noble this is. Without this profound commitment, we cannot repel the attacks of the three powerful enemies and advance kosen-rufu in the evil age of the Latter Day of the Law.

Note on terminology: The three powerful enemies are three types of arrogant people who persecute those who propagate the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni Buddha's death, described in the concluding verse section of the "Encouraging Devotion" (13th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The Great Teacher Miao-lo of China summarizes them as arrogant lay people, arrogant priests, and arrogant false sages.

Bodhisattvas of the Earth always emerge courageously in the most challenging times and the most challenging places.

The difficulties you may now be facing are, from the perspective of faith in Nichiren Buddhism, part of your chosen mission. Forging ahead with that conviction is proof that your prayers are infused with the vow for kosen-rufu.

If you have some pressing problem—be it work, money, health, a relationship, or some other challenge—it is important that you chant earnestly to triumph over it. Your own clear proof of victory will become a source of hope and inspiration for others experiencing the same kind of problems.

We can transform karma into mission through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with the recognition that we have voluntarily assumed the appropriate karma in order to show others the power of the Mystic Law in this lifetime.

Therefore, summon up your courage and chant for the happiness of yourself and others. That is an expression of deep compassion. When you chant not just for your own happiness but also for that of others, you will attain a life state in which you can gaze down calmly and serenely upon the struggles you are facing.

You will still have problems, but they won't overwhelm you. Viewing difficulties as peace and comfort (cf. OTT, 115), as the Daishonin teaches, please continue chanting earnestly for kosen-rufu and courageously taking part in efforts to share Nichiren Buddhism with others. Prayers for kosen-rufu are the prayers of Buddhas and bodhisattvas.

When we take on big problems and chant abundantly to find a way to solve them, we can expand and elevate our life state. Before we notice it, our minor, petty problems will all have been resolved. This is the ultimate essence of the Buddhist teaching that the sufferings of earthly desires lead to enlightenment.

Chanting about challenges in our life and chanting for kosen-rufu, the aspiration to help all people become happy, are essentially one and indivisible. Both propel us forward.

Our personal victories are actual proof of kosen-rufu. When we chant strongly for the development of the Soka Gakkai, which is advancing kosen-rufu, we forge invincible inner strength and attain the towering life state of champions.

Describing the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, the Lotus Sutra states: "Their minds know no fear" (LSOC15, 263). "Rejoicing in their hearts" (cf. LSOC15, 255) at all times, they exert themselves freely as though performing a dance.

Awakening to one's mission as a Bodhisattva of the Earth is to come face-to-face with the innermost essence of one's life. It is finding the answers to the questions, "Why was I born?" and "What is the purpose of my life?" There is no greater joy, fulfillment, or pride than that which comes from awakening to our eternal mission.

While in exile on Sado Island, the Daishonin declared, together with his disciples, that he felt "immeasurable delight" (WND-1, 386).

Manifesting our true identity as Bodhisattvas of the Earth enables our limitless, inner human potential to blossom fully. Ours is a momentous endeavor for peace that aims to fundamentally transform the consciousness of humankind, lifting humanity to unsurpassed heights and uniting people everywhere.

From Youth and the Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, published in Japanese in September 2012.

Section 12.4: All Karma Has Profound Meaning

In his lecture on Nichiren Daishonin's writing "The Opening of the Eyes," President Ikeda explains that when we strive with the determination to "transform karma into mission," we can turn any adversity into the impetus for our human revolution.

Nichiren Daishonin states that his experiencing great persecutions corresponds with the Buddhist teaching that bodhisattvas voluntarily assume the appropriate karma and choose to take on suffering out of a desire to lead living beings to enlightenment. And just as bodhisattvas regard undergoing suffering on behalf of living beings as a source of joy, the Daishonin says he also views experiencing pain and hardship resulting from these present persecutions as a cause for rejoicing, because it will enable him to escape falling into the evil paths in future existences.

The Daishonin's assertion that voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma is a source of joy echoes the final lines of "The Opening of the Eyes," where he states: "For what I have done, I have been condemned to exile, but it is a small suffering to undergo in this present life and not one worth lamenting. In future lives I will enjoy immense happiness, a thought that gives me great joy" (WND-1, 287).

The principle of "voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma" is the logical conclusion of the Buddhist concept of changing one's karma. Simply put, it represents a way of life in which we transform karma into mission.

Everything that happens in our lives has meaning. Moreover, the way of life of practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism is to find and discover meaning in all things. Nothing is insignificant. Whatever a person's karma may be, it definitely has profound meaning. This is not just a matter of outlook. Changing the world starts by changing our fundamental state of mind. This is a key Buddhist principle. A powerful determination to transform even negative karma into mission can dramatically transform the real world. By changing our inner state of mind, we can change any suffering or hardship into a source of joy, regarding it as a means for forging and developing our lives. To turn even sorrow into a source of creativity—that is the way of life of practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism.

The Daishonin teaches us this essential path through his own life and actions as the votary of the Lotus Sutra.

To have a fighting spirit is itself the direct path to happiness. Only through struggles and challenges can we develop inner strength and truly creative lives. Also, by maintaining unwavering faith in the correct teaching of Buddhism no matter what obstacles or hardships arise, we can enter the path of happiness for all eternity. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime means securing this path in our daily lives during our present existence.

I therefore believe that practitioners of the correct teaching who strive ceaselessly to spread the Law exemplify the highest expression of humanity taught by the Daishonin based on the Lotus Sutra.

Viewed from this perspective, all difficulties become the genuine foundation for our personal development and growth. Practitioners of the correct teaching who endure obstacles with the awareness, "[If devils did not arise], there would be no way of knowing that this is the correct teaching" (WND-1, 501), come to embody the Mystic Law without fail. They attain the expansive state of life in which they can "regard all difficulties as peace and comfort" (cf. OTT, 115), and rejoice at them with the spirit conveyed when Nichiren Daishonin writes, "The greater the hardships befalling him, the greater the delight he feels, because of his strong faith" (WND-1, 33).

In "The Opening of the Eyes," the Daishonin says: "When iron is heated, if it is not strenuously forged, the impurities in it will not become apparent. Only when it is subjected to the tempering process again and again will the flaws appear. When pressing hemp seeds, if one does not press very hard, one will not get much oil from them" (WND-1, 281–82).

In "Letter from Sado," the Daishonin also observes: "It is impossible to fathom one's karma. Iron, when heated in the flames and pounded, becomes a fine sword. Worthies and sages are tested by abuse" (WND-1, 303). And in "Letter to the Brothers," he writes: "Both of you have continued believing in the Lotus Sutra; thus you are now ridding yourselves of your grave offenses from the past. For example, the flaws in iron come to the surface when it is forged" (WND-1, 497).

A life that is forged through efforts to protect the Law drives out the impurities of the negative karma created through slander and endures eternally over the three existences—past, present, and future. From time without beginning, we have repeated the cycle of birth and death. In this lifetime, however, we have had the good fortune to encounter Nichiren Buddhism. Because we practice the correct teaching, denounce slander of the Law, and forge inner strength, we can change our karma and establish the eternally indestructible state of Buddhahood in our lives. This is the attainment of Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Pure and committed practice of Nichiren Buddhism entirely changes the meaning of hardships in our lives. We no longer view challenges and trials as negatives to be avoided but as things which, when overcome, bring us closer to our attainment of Buddhahood. Of course, it may not be easy for those in the midst of painful challenges to appreciate this fact. No one wishes to experience hardships. It's human nature to prefer to avoid them.

But if we understand the ultimate transformative teaching of the Mystic Law, we can recognize that our hardships have arisen because we are struggling against negative functions, and we can be confident that by overcoming those hardships, we can attain the supreme life state of Buddhahood. With this positive approach, we can live with fundamental strength and resilience in the face of any difficulty.

Members of the Soka Gakkai understand this ultimate Buddhist truth in the depths of their beings. As proof of this, when our members encounter hardships, they are strong and, above all, positive. That's because they have already experienced in their own lives the rhythm of fundamental good that accompanies the process of changing karma. Or even if they haven't yet experienced it themselves, they are constantly in contact with others who have.

Those who strive in faith for kosen-rufu while battling their karma embody the quintessential Buddhist principle of "voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma." Our members, comrades from the distant past, summon forth the heart of the lion king—the spirit to bravely take on challenges, never fearing hardships or lamenting painful trials—as they struggle valiantly to transform their karma into their mission and enact the victorious drama of a great human revolution. They possess a truly lofty state of life.

Accordingly, defeat for a practitioner of Nichiren Buddhism lies not in encountering difficulties but rather in not challenging them. Difficulties only truly become our destiny if we run away from them. We must fight as long as we live. We must live and struggle tenaciously to the end. The Daishonin's philosophy of changing karma, which teaches this important essence of life, is also a revolutionary teaching, in that it represents a radical departure from the way religion has tended to view difficulties.

To practice Nichiren Buddhism is to live with the unshakable conviction that the most painful and trying times are opportunities for changing karma, for carrying out our human revolution, and that no matter how difficult the situation, we can ultimately, and without fail, transform it into something positive.

And it is the Soka Gakkai, an organization directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin, that puts this teaching of changing karma into practice in reality and takes this revolutionary philosophy to the world. With this pride and joy, let us continue our efforts to share Nichiren Buddhism with others.

From Lectures on "The Opening of the Eyes," published in Japanese in June 2006.

Section 12.5: Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Holds the Key to Changing Poison into Medicine

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo gives us the power to transform our karma into our mission. President Ikeda explains that when we persevere in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can positively transform all of our struggles and sorrows into happiness, in accord with the Buddhist principle of "changing poison into medicine."

We live in the saha world—a world requiring forbearance and endurance. In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin says: "Saha means a world in which one must exercise forbearance and learn to endure" (OTT, 169).

There are always things in this life that we have to endure and persevere through. Nichiren Buddhism and faith as taught and practiced in the Soka Gakkai enable us to calmly overcome every form of sadness, suffering, and karma, and attain a state of supreme happiness.

Life is filled with all sorts of struggles and sufferings—our own illness or that of loved ones, death, financial hardship, relationship problems, the frustration of not being able to have what we want, and the list goes on. Problems are unavoidable. They are an inescapable reality of life.

Practicing Nichiren Buddhism, and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, enables us to positively transform all of those sufferings, in accord with the principle of "changing poison into medicine." The poison of suffering is transformed into the medicine of joy.

Note on terminology: "Changing poison into medicine" is the principle that earthly desires and suffering can be transformed into benefit and enlightenment by virtue of the power of the Mystic Law. This phrase is found in a passage from The Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom, which mentions "a great physician who can change poison into medicine."

Because of the principle that "earthly desires lead to enlightenment," suffering becomes enlightenment and happiness. The greater our problem or sorrow, the greater the happiness we can change it into. This is the power of daimoku. That's why those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo do not fear anything. There is no need to.

Young saplings are buffeted easily by the slightest wind, but when they grow into sturdy, tall trees, they stand unshaken by even the fiercest storm. People, similarly, when their life force is weak, are easily disturbed by the "winds" of even minor problems or worries.

Living in this saha world, it is impossible to stop the winds of suffering from blowing. Our only alternative is to become strong. When we develop dauntless fortitude, like mighty trees, we will be untroubled by even the most powerful gales. In fact, we can even find them exhilarating. The aim of our Buddhist practice is to carry out our human revolution so that we can lead such lives and develop such inner strength.

Though we may not notice it, a tree grows every day. In the same indiscernible way, our daimoku nurtures our growth day after day into people of unshakable strength who abound with good fortune. After 10 or 20 years of practicing with the Soka Gakkai, the great benefit we have accumulated becomes clearly visible.

The Mystic Law is the supreme treasure in the universe. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo allows us to accumulate that treasure in our lives on a daily basis. At the same time, it functions to cleanse our lives of negative karma from past actions, just as pure water flushes out dirty water.

The process of purification takes time. At the start, we have to struggle with the slightly dirty water of our negative karma. The power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, however, lightens this task, too. That's why it's so important that we continue chanting. When our lives are eventually purified, everything will start improving dramatically.

We will definitely attain an indestructible state of absolute happiness brimming with good fortune and benefit. We will then enjoy whatever happens. We will be content, even if we do not have fame or fortune. Each moment will be deeply satisfying. Joy will fill our hearts, and everything will appear beautiful to us. We will be able to swiftly discern right and wrong, the true essence of all things. Whatever our own circumstances, we will be able to give thought to the welfare of others. That's the kind of people we will become.

The way to happiness is not complicated. Those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo consistently in the realm of kosen-rufu triumph in the end. They are certain to attain a state of absolute happiness—in other words, the life state of Buddhahood. If you remember this single important point, your life will always be solid and secure.

From remarks on his first visit to the SGI-Brazil Auditorium in São Paulo, Brazil, March 3, 1993.

Section 12.6: Our Personal Experiences of Changing Karma Give Hope to Others

Referring to the many hardships and persecutions that befell Shakyamuni Buddha during his lifetime, President Ikeda explains that our experiences of overcoming various difficulties serve as sources of hope and encouragement to those who will follow in our footsteps on the path of faith.

Why was it that a Buddha such as Shakyamuni had to suffer groundless slander and abuse? In one Buddhist scripture, he states that it was all for the sake of future practitioners of Buddhism.

In other words, Shakyamuni says, he called forth such hardships as expedient means, so that when others practice Buddhism and face unpleasant criticism, feeling they want to quit their Buddhist practice, they will remind themselves that even he was unjustly maligned, and encourage themselves to press on with fresh resolve.

To personally undergo difficulties in order to prevent practitioners in future ages from giving up is an expression of the Buddha's compassion.

In one respect, all the challenges and hardships we of the Soka Gakkai experience today are for the sake of the eternal future of kosen-rufu. They will serve as a reference point for distant ages hence, a model and blueprint of kosen-rufu for future generations.

No doubt our fellow members of ages to come will look back and say, "So that's what happened then. Such difficulties arising is a timeless and unchanging pattern, so we mustn't allow ourselves to be defeated when we encounter them. We can overcome everything through our Buddhist practice. Let's fight on!" The record of our struggles will be a source from which they can draw limitless courage, hope, and inspiration.

In that sense, our struggles with the many hardships that arise in the course of our Buddhist practice are part of a grand drama, a towering epic, that we are performing on the stage of this brief lifetime to achieve magnificent and everlasting victories in our lives and in kosen-rufu.

By extension, the personal problems we face even as leaders—be it illness or some family misfortune—can also serve as sources of tremendous encouragement to others who are suffering from similar problems, spurring them to do their best and remain undefeated.

Based on the Daishonin's writings, we can be assured that courageous individuals who challenge difficulties and energetically spread the Mystic Law will definitely enjoy the protection of all Buddhas. It is the heart of Shakyamuni and the compassionate spirit of Nichiren Daishonin to resolutely safeguard all dedicated practitioners of Buddhism who are striving for kosen-rufu.

Please be confident that your strong prayers will activate the power of the world of Buddhahood inherent in the universe itself, and further resonate with the workings of the worlds of bodhisattvas, voice-hearers, and cause-awakened ones as well as the protective functions of all heavenly deities, enabling you to open the way to a life of great victory and complete fulfillment.

Note on terminology: The worlds of voice-hearers, cause-awakened ones, and bodhisattvas together with the world of Buddhahood form the four noble worlds—the highest four of the Ten Worlds. They are also known as the life states of learning, realization, bodhisattva, and Buddhahood.

From a speech at a Chubu Region general meeting, Aichi, January 29, 1989.

Section 12.7: A Triumphant Drama

In this essay, President Ikeda recounts the story of an SGI-USA member who, through changing her karma into mission, achieved a life of great human revolution. Praising her, he says that the Soka Gakkai is a gathering of bodhisattvas who have stood up to shoulder their own unique, noble missions.

Throughout Japan and the world, our women's division members—the mothers of kosen-rufu—are leading their lives with confidence, determination, and fortitude.

One such woman is an SGI-USA pioneer member. After marrying an American in Japan, she went to the United States with her husband and their young son in 1966. Her husband was in the military and was sent to Vietnam. Left alone in the United States with her son and not yet fluent in English, she performed hard menial work to earn extra money to make ends meet. Even after her husband's return from the war, the family's financial difficulties continued.

Eventually the couple had another son, but he was born with serious disabilities. Doctors said he would never walk or talk and advised them to commit him to an institution, but the mother fiercely resolved to raise her son herself.

To survive, she sold virtually everything she had—her clothes, including the precious silk kimono she had brought from Japan, her pots and pans—but the family still didn't have enough to live on. Why did she experience all this suffering? The harsh waves of karma seemed to pound her relentlessly.

Having been an active district-level leader in the Soka Gakkai in Japan, however, this member squarely faced the challenges before her; she refused to run away from reality. She held down a job during the day and exerted herself tirelessly on the front lines of kosen-rufu in the evenings.

One evening, she was seated before the Gohonzon as usual. As she was chanting in a clear, resounding voice, the hour grew late; suddenly, she felt as if a brilliant light illuminated her mind: "I am a proud member of the Soka Gakkai. I have the Gohonzon. I have nothing to fear. There is no way that I won't become happy." Tears of unsurpassed joy fell from her eyes.

The sun of happiness rises brightly in the lives of those who valiantly take on, here and now, the challenges presented by their circumstances, their lives, and the struggle for kosen-rufu.

In a letter addressed to a woman follower, the Daishonin writes: "There is nothing to lament when we consider that we will surely become Buddhas" (WND-1, 657).

The Lotus Sutra teaches the profound principle of "voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma." According to the sutra, bodhisattvas, of their own free will, seek to be reborn into an evil age because they empathize with those who are suffering and wish to lead them to happiness.

Each of us, no matter what hardships we may face or what circumstances we may find ourselves in, has a noble mission that only we can fulfill. When we deeply recognize this, everything changes.

We have been born in this world, at this time, to accomplish the great vow we made in the remote past. Our karma is our mission; it is the stage upon which we play out our magnificent drama of transforming adversity into triumph. No matter how difficult or challenging the reality of our lives may be, there is no other separate place where we can achieve happiness.

This pioneer member's elder son grew up watching his mother's courageous example. He went on to graduate as a top student of his class at Yale University.

Her younger son, whom doctors had said would never walk, can even run now, and he also participates in SGI meetings.

This January, this wonderful woman, at 79, declared proudly: "I don't feel old at all. For kosen-rufu, I will continue speaking out to defend the truth and justice of the Soka Gakkai as long as I live!" She is a woman who has triumphed brilliantly.

The resounding music of our women's division members' unceasing efforts fills the air day after day in every community and locale. Truly, they are the driving force of kosen-rufu, and no praise, no matter how eloquent, can fully do them justice. Every day, my wife and I pray earnestly and sincerely that all of these admirable women who work for and devote themselves to kosen-rufu will enjoy lives of boundless happiness and fulfillment.

Mothers of kosen-rufu, who shine like the sun, let your joyous voices ring out even more powerfully with courage, truth, and victory!

I will pray all my life for your wonderful development, and that your strong, happy, and wise voices may resound ever more vibrantly.

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, January 19, 2004.

Section 12.9: A New Guide for Humanity

In his afterword to The New Human Revolution, President Ikeda reaffirms the principle of changing human karma or destiny, the main theme of his novel series The Human Revolution and The New Human Revolution. He voices confidence that the philosophy of human revolution, which enables us to turn karma into mission, offers a new guide for humanity in the third millennium.

The main theme of both The Human Revolution and The New Human Revolution is: "A great human revolution in just a single individual will help achieve a change in the destiny of a nation and, further, will enable a change in the destiny of all humankind."

How, then, do we actually go about changing our destiny or karma?

The profound awakening that Josei Toda experienced while in prison holds the answer to this question. Wishing to grasp the truth of the Lotus Sutra, he carefully read its passages again and again and chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo each day in his prison cell. In the course of doing so, he eventually awakened to the fact that he had been present along with Nichiren Daishonin at the Ceremony in the Air depicted in the Lotus Sutra and was a Bodhisattva of the Earth entrusted with propagating the Law in the Latter Day. With inexpressible joy at this realization, he vowed to dedicate his life to kosen-rufu.

The Daishonin writes: "If you are of the same mind as Nichiren, you must be a Bodhisattva of the Earth" (WND-1, 385). As this indicates, we, who devote ourselves to kosen-rufu just as the Daishonin teaches, are irrefutably Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

Why is it, then, that we—noble bodhisattvas tasked with the solemn undertaking of kosen-rufu—have been born with karma that causes us various kinds of suffering?

The "Teacher of the Law" (10th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra states: "These people voluntarily relinquish the reward due them for their pure deeds and, in the time after I have passed into extinction, because they pity living beings, they are born in this evil world so they may broadly expound this sutra" (LSOC10, 200). The Great Teacher Miao-lo of China identifies this passage as articulating the principle of "voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma."

Just as this principle explains, we have chosen, in accord with our vow as bodhisattvas, to be born into the evil age of the Latter Day of the Law with all sorts of destinies, or karma—illness, financial hardship, family discord, loneliness, low self-esteem, and the list goes on—to help guide others to enlightenment. But by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, striving in our Buddhist practice for ourselves and others, and dedicating our lives to kosen-rufu, our vibrant life force as Bodhisattvas of the Earth and the expansive life state of Buddhahood well forth within us. Our lives will brim with the wisdom, courage, strength, hope, and joy to overcome every hardship and daunting obstacle that arises. As we bravely triumph over the onslaughts of karma, we demonstrate the validity of the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism and the tremendous benefit of our Buddhist practice, and further advance kosen-rufu. In fact, we have willingly taken on these hardships and sufferings in order to do just that.

Karma and mission are two sides of the same coin, and our karma directly becomes our unique and noble mission. That is why, when we dedicate our lives to kosen-rufu, there is no destiny that we cannot change.

We are all Bodhisattvas of the Earth and have a right to become happy. We are the lead players and stars in a glorious drama performed on the grand stage of life—a drama of changing the icy winds of winter into the warm sunshine of spring, transforming suffering into joy.

The New Human Revolution unfolds as a story of changing karma or destiny into mission. The quintessential teaching of Nichiren Buddhism does not view life and its phenomena as fixed or static, but elucidates life's dynamism, in which everything is changing and open to change, as is seen in such principles as "earthly desires are enlightenment," "the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana," and "changing poison into medicine."

It also perceives the potential for Buddhahood in the depths of the life of each suffering human being, and teaches the way to awaken and manifest that life state—in other words, the supreme positive potential, creativity, and autonomy of human beings. This process of changing our lives, or inner transformation, we call human revolution.

Human beings are the builders and shapers of the societies, nations, and the world in which they live. Hatred and trust, disdain and respect, war and peace—all are the products of the human heart and mind. As a result, without human revolution, there can be no true personal happiness, social prosperity, or lasting world peace. Without this crucial element, any attempts to effect enduring change will be in vain. The philosophy of human revolution based on the principles of Nichiren Buddhism is certain to become a new guide for humanity as we set forth into this third millennium.

The Russian writer Leo Tolstoy observed to the effect that an immortal spirit likewise requires immortal deeds. This is from his Complete Works, or Polnoe sobranie sochinenii, volume 45.

It is my sincere hope that Soka Gakkai members will make the completion of The New Human Revolution a fresh starting point and stand up as "Shin'ichi Yamamotos" to work for the happiness of others. I pray that, through their tireless, tenacious efforts, they will create their own brilliant history of human revolution.

As long as suffering and misery exist anywhere on our planet, we must continue to weave with rich color and bold creativity the magnificent tapestry of human victory that is kosen-rufu. That is why our mentor-disciple journey to realize the great vow for kosen-rufu will continue forever.

From The New Human Revolution, volume 30, "Afterword."
