Chapter 2: Developing a Life State of Happiness

Nichiren Buddhism teaches that the supremely respectworthy life state of Buddhahood, replete with the highest wisdom, courage, and compassion, is inherent in the lives of all people. When we reveal that life state, our perspective is transformed and we can build a state of unimpeded, absolute happiness. This chapter presents President Ikeda's teachings concerning that inner transformation.

Section 2.1: Living with Optimism

In this selection, he explains how those who embrace the Mystic Law can lead lives of optimism, in which life is in itself a joyous experience.

Let's lead vibrant, enjoyable lives. We have the Gohonzon. We have the Mystic Law. That means that each of us is an embodiment of the Mystic Law, an embodiment of infinite good fortune, and a majestic treasure tower. As a result, we will not be defeated; we have nothing to fear.

When we firmly believe that our life is the treasure tower and that we each embody Buddhahood, we come to find life itself enjoyable and pleasant. Attaining and savoring such a wonderful state of mind is the purpose of our Buddhist faith and practice.

Those who live their lives in the realm of the Soka Gakkai, in the realm of kosen-rufu, will enjoy such a joy-filled state of life eternally, throughout the three existences of past, present, and future.

Do we live our lives as optimists or pessimists?

Pessimists focus on the sad, painful, gloomy side of things. "What will I do if my husband dies?" "What will I do if my wife falls ill?" "What if I can't achieve my goals?" "What if my daughter falls in love with someone who is no good for her?"

If you're always thinking pessimistic thoughts, pessimism will taint your mind. You will never be able to be happy. If you're always seeing things in a negative, gloomy light, bemoaning your situation and worrying—"I never have any money," "Oh, no, another meeting!" or "What if I'm scolded again today?"—then life will be nothing but a painful austerity!

On the other hand, you can look at the bright side of everything. You can take what happens and view it in a positive, hopeful, and cheerful light. This is optimism, the ultimate form of which is faith in the Mystic Law. For example, if you get sick, you can say: "Now I can get some rest! It'll give me a chance to ponder the three existences!"

And with hope in your heart you can declare that you won't let this sickness defeat you, that you will survive it, and thus vanquish the "devil of illness."

Optimists are strong. They see the positive in everything and decide to make it a reality for all to see.

I hope you will live with optimism, remaining undefeated by whatever happens in life, transforming hardship into joy, and laughing off adversity like the famous comic actor Charlie Chaplin.

This was from a speech at an SGI-Canada Vancouver general meeting, Canada, October 1, 1993.

Section 2.2: The Key to Happiness Is Inner Transformation

Happiness is a function of our state of mind. This is why the Soka Gakkai movement, which embraces the philosophy that "It is the heart that is important" and seeks to transform our lives, is the fundamental path to happiness.

We may encounter all kinds of problems in the course of life. There will also undoubtedly be times when we are faced with circumstances beyond our control. But why is it that, in the same situation, one person advances vibrantly, while another sorrows and laments? It is because happiness is an internal condition, something we feel in our hearts.

If we can live our lives with joy, if we enjoy living, then we are winners. That's why transforming our hearts and minds is so important. This is the essence of Nichiren Buddhism.

External appearances are not what matters. There are many people whose circumstances are the envy of others, but who are actually very unhappy. Those with strong, wise, resilient, and generous hearts remain upbeat and positive, no matter what happens.

"It is the heart that is important," writes the Daishonin. This is the foundation for happiness—a foundation we establish through the Mystic Law.

The Daishonin declares: "The wonderful means of truly putting an end to the physical and spiritual obstacles of all living beings is none other than Nam-myoho-renge-kyo."

Happiness is not just a word. It is not found in objects, nor is it determined by wealth, social status, or celebrity.

The key, first of all, is to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. When we do so, we will feel an upsurge of life force.

To feel joy in the depths of our lives, no matter what happens, to take delight in each moment of each day as we converse with friends and chant to our heart's content—these are examples of genuine happiness.

Our Soka Gakkai movement teaches the fundamental way to achieve such happiness.

If we live out our lives based on faith in the Mystic Law, we will experience joy in both life and death. Let us serenely surmount every obstacle and keep moving forward with joy and high spirits.

This was from a speech at a joint training session, Nagano, August 6, 2005.

Section 2.3: The Life State of Practitioners of the Mystic Law

Describing three characteristics or qualities of practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism, President Ikeda calls on us to be courageous and filled with hope as we build a self that can savor joy at all times.

What characterizes the life state of genuine practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism?

First of all, it is having no fear—not being disturbed or daunted by anything. Lies and deceit abound in society. It is foolish to allow ourselves to be swayed by such things; it only leads to unhappiness. The Mystic Law and Nichiren Daishonin are absolutely free of any falsehood. The wisest possible course, therefore, is to dedicate our lives to the widespread propagation of the Law—to kosen-rufu.

On account of our faith in Nichiren Buddhism, we may from time to time encounter unpleasantness from others. We may also find ourselves working much harder than many around us. But that is all part of our Buddhist practice.

The Daishonin teaches that we can attain enlightenment in this lifetime. This entails weathering the trials of the three obstacles and four devils. But if we can do that, we can attain enlightenment in this lifetime and enjoy the boundless life state of Buddhahood throughout eternity. That's why we need to forge ahead fearlessly, positively, and courageously, come what may.

The second characteristic is living with vibrant hope. Nothing is stronger than hope. The Mystic Law is a source of eternal hope. People who never lose hope, no matter what happens, are truly happy.

The third characteristic is a state of life in which we savor joy at all times. It is to have such joy that, even at the time of death, one can say with a heartfelt smile: "What a wonderful life that was! Now where shall I go next?" That is the life state of a genuine practitioner of Nichiren Buddhism.

Our Buddhist practice enables us to achieve an expansive state of being in which we can enjoy everything in life. As the Daishonin says, faith in the Mystic Law is "the greatest of all joys."

This was from a speech at a Chubu Region representatives conference, Aichi, May 26, 1997.

Note: The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are the obstacle of earthly desires, the obstacle of karma, and the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are the hindrance of the five components, the hindrance of earthly desires, the hindrance of death, and the hindrance of the devil king.

Section 2.4: Our Happiness Is Determined by Our Inner Life Condition

Happiness is not determined by our circumstances, but is something each of us creates for ourselves through our inner life condition. Nichiren Buddhism teaches the way to elevate that life condition.

The English poet John Milton wrote: "The mind is its own place, and in itself can make a Heaven of Hell, a Hell of Heaven."

This statement, a product of the poet's profound insight, resonates with the Buddhist teaching of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life."

How we see the world and feel about our lives is determined solely by our inner life condition. Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Hungry spirits perceive the Ganges River as fire, human beings perceive it as water, and heavenly beings perceive it as amrita. Though the water is the same, it appears differently according to one's karmic reward from the past."

Amrita is a legendary, ambrosia-like liquid. In ancient India, it was regarded as the sweet-tasting beverage of the gods. Amrita means immortality and is often translated as sweet dew.

"Karmic reward from the past" refers to our present life state, which is the result of past actions or causes created through our own words, thoughts, and deeds. That state of life determines our view of and feelings toward the external world.

The same circumstances may be perceived as utter bliss by one person and unbearable misfortune by another. And while some people may love the place where they live, thinking it's the best place ever, others may hate it and constantly seek to find happiness somewhere else.

Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching that enables us to elevate our inner state of life, realizing genuinely happy lives for ourselves as well as prosperity for society. It is the great teaching of the "actual three thousand realms in a single moment of life," making it possible for us to transform the place where we dwell into the Land of Eternally Tranquil Light.

Moreover, the good fortune, benefit, and joy we gain through living in accord with the eternal Law of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo are not temporary. In the same way that trees steadily add growth rings with each passing year, our lives accumulate good fortune that will endure throughout the three existences of past, present, and future. In contrast, worldly wealth and fame as well as various amusements and pleasures—no matter how glamorous or exciting they may seem for a time—are fleeting and insubstantial.

This was from a speech at a Wakayama Prefecture general meeting, Wakayama, March 24, 1988.

Section 2.5: Happiness Is Found Where We Are

The writings of Nichiren Daishonin show us we can build a state of unshakable happiness in our own lives here and now.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin explains the following passage from the "Encouragements of the Bodhisattva Universal Worthy" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, "Before long this person will proceed to the place of enlightenment," stating:

"The words 'this person' refer to the practitioner of the Lotus Sutra. The place where the person upholds and honors the Lotus Sutra is the 'place of enlightenment' to which the person proceeds. It is not that he leaves his present place and goes to some other place. The 'place of enlightenment' is the place where the living beings of the Ten Worlds reside. And now the place where Nichiren and his followers chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, 'whether in mountain valleys or the wide wilderness,' these places are all the Land of Eternally Tranquil Light. This is what is meant by the 'place of enlightenment.'"

"This person" refers to the practitioner, or votary, of the Lotus Sutra. In the specific sense, it indicates Nichiren Daishonin himself, while in the more general sense, it refers to all people who embrace and practice Nam-myoho-renge-kyo of the Three Great Secret Laws. The place where people embrace and practice the correct teaching of Buddhism is the "place of enlightenment to which the person proceeds," in other words, the place where we strive to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

There is no need to leave this trouble-filled saha world for some otherworldly pure land or ideal paradise. The "place of enlightenment" is none other than the dwelling place of living beings of the Ten Worlds. Now, the place where Nichiren Daishonin and his disciples who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo reside is the land of Eternally Tranquil Light, or the Buddha land, whether it be "in mountain valleys or the wide wilderness." It is the "place of enlightenment," the Daishonin asserts. The place where each practitioner lives becomes the Land of Tranquil Light. This passage alludes to the profound transformative power inherent in a single life-moment.

People often tend to think of happiness as something abstract and removed from their present realities. They imagine, for example, that they would be happier if they could move to another place, or that they would enjoy more comfortable and pleasant lives if they could change jobs. They always feel that the grass is greener on the other side and place their hopes on a change of external circumstances. Young people are particularly susceptible to this tendency.

However, we all have different missions to fulfill in life and different places where we need to live to fulfill them. Those who decide to put down solid roots where they are and continue to live their lives with perseverance and hope while struggling with reality will be victors in life. It's important not to live aimlessly, lacking any clear purpose. I therefore say to you: "Dig beneath your feet, there you will find a spring," and "Live in a way that is true to yourself."

In short, a real sense of happiness and deep satisfaction in life can only be found within us. The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of life. Through our Buddhist practice, we can tap the power of the Mystic Law to propel our lives forward. This is why the place where we carry out our Buddhist practice and also society become the Buddha land. We are able to transform where we live right now into a place of victory and happiness.

This was from a speech at a university groups and Toshima Ward joint training session, Tokyo, December 7, 1986.

Section 2.6: Activating the Limitless Life Force of Buddhahood

President Ikeda explains the nature of the world of Buddhahood, the highest life state of the Buddhist analysis of life articulated in the principle of the mutual possession of the Ten Worlds, and how we can manifest it.

Life, which is constantly changing from moment to moment, can be broadly categorized into ten states, which Buddhism articulates as the Ten Worlds. These consist of the six paths—the worlds of hell, hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human beings, and heavenly beings—and the four noble worlds—the worlds of voice-hearers, cause-awakened ones, bodhisattvas, and Buddhas. The true reality of life is that it always possesses all ten of these potential states.

None of the Ten Worlds that appear in our lives at any given moment remain fixed or constant. They change instant by instant. Buddhism's deep insight into this dynamic nature of life is expressed as the principle of the "mutual possession of the Ten Worlds."

In his treatise "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," Nichiren Daishonin illustrates clearly and simply how the world of human beings, or life state of humanity, contains within it the other nine worlds:

"When we look from time to time at a person's face, we find him or her sometimes joyful, sometimes enraged, and sometimes calm. At times greed appears in the person's face, at times foolishness, and at times perversity. Rage is the world of hell, greed is that of hungry spirits, foolishness is that of animals, perversity is that of asuras, joy is that of heaven, and calmness is that of human beings."

The nine worlds are continually emerging and becoming dormant within us. This is something that we can see, sense, and recognize in our own daily lives.

It is important to note here that the teachings of Buddhism from the very beginning were always concerned with enabling people to manifest the noble and infinitely powerful life state of Buddhahood. And, indeed, that should always be the purpose of Buddhist practice. Focusing on this point, the great teaching of Nichiren Daishonin, by establishing the correct object of devotion, the Gohonzon of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, sets forth a practical means for revealing our inner Buddhahood. As such, Nichiren Buddhism is a practice open to all people.

A look at history to this day shows that humanity is still trapped in the cycle of the six paths, or lower six worlds. The character for "earth" is contained in the Japanese word for "hell," imparting the meaning of being bound or shackled to something of the lowest or basest level. Humanity and society can never achieve substantial revitalization unless people give serious thought to casting off the shackles of these lower worlds and elevating their state of life. Even in the midst of this troubled and corrupt world, Buddhism discovers in human life the highest and most dignified potential of Buddhahood.

Though our lives may constantly move through the six paths, we can activate the limitless life force of Buddhahood by focusing our minds on the correct object of devotion and achieving the "fusion of reality and wisdom."

Buddhahood is difficult to describe in words. Unlike the other nine worlds, it has no concrete expression. It is the ultimate function of life that moves the nine worlds in the direction of boundless value.

Even on cloudy or rainy days, by the time a plane reaches an altitude of about 10,000 meters or 33,000 feet, it is flying high above the clouds amid bright sunshine and can proceed smoothly on its course. In the same way, no matter how painful or difficult our daily existence may be, if we make the sun in our hearts shine brightly, we can overcome all adversity with calm composure. That inner sun is the life state of Buddhahood.

In one sense, as the Daishonin states in The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings: "Bodhisattva is a preliminary step toward the attainment of the effect of Buddhahood." The world of bodhisattvas is characterized by taking action for the sake of the Law, people, and society. Without such bodhisattva practice as our foundation, we cannot attain Buddhahood. Buddhahood is not something realized simply through conceptual understanding. Even reading countless Buddhist scriptures or books on Buddhism will not lead one to true enlightenment.

In addition, attaining Buddhahood doesn't mean that we become someone different. We remain who we are, living out our lives in the reality of society, where the nine worlds—especially the six paths—prevail. A genuine Buddhist philosophy does not present enlightenment or Buddhas as something mysterious or otherworldly.

What is important for us as human beings is to elevate our lives from a lower to a higher state, to expand our lives from a closed, narrow state of life to one that is infinitely vast and encompassing. Buddhahood represents the supreme state of life.

This was from On Life and Buddhism, published in Japanese in November 1986.

Section 2.7: Establishing Buddhahood as Our Basic Life Tendency

In this selection, President Ikeda explains that in Nichiren Buddhism, Buddhahood is not something we hope to achieve after death, but is instead an open and manifest life state that we can achieve within our lives as we are.

One way to view the principle that each of us is an entity of the mutual possession of the Ten Worlds is to look at it from the perspective of our basic life tendency. While we all possess the Ten Worlds, our lives often lean toward one particular life state more than others—for instance, some people's lives are basically inclined toward the life state of hell, while others tend naturally toward the state of bodhisattva. This could be called the "habit pattern" of one's life, a predisposition formed through karmic causes that a person has accumulated from the past.

Just as a spring returns to its original shape after being stretched, people tend to revert to their own basic tendency. But even if one's basic life tendency is the life state of hell, it doesn't mean that one will remain in that state 24 hours a day. That person will still move from one life state to another—for instance, sometimes manifesting that of humanity, sometimes that of anger, and so on. Likewise, those whose basic life tendency is anger—driven by the desire to always be better than others—will also sometimes manifest higher life states such as heaven or bodhisattva. However, even if they momentarily manifest the state of bodhisattva, they will quickly revert to their basic life tendency of anger.

Changing our basic life tendency means carrying out our human revolution and fundamentally transforming our state of life. It means changing our mind-set or resolve on the deepest level. The kind of life we live is decided by our basic life tendency. For example, those whose basic life tendency is hunger are as though on board a ship called Hunger. While sailing ahead in the state of hunger, they will sometimes experience joy and sometimes suffering. Though there are various ups and downs, the ship unerringly proceeds on its set course. Consequently, for those on board this ship, everything they see will be colored by the hues of hunger. And even after they die, their lives will merge with the realm of hunger inherent in the universe.

Establishing the state of Buddhahood as our basic life tendency is what it means to "attain Buddhahood." Of course, even with Buddhahood as our basic life tendency, we won't be free of problems or suffering because we will still possess the other nine worlds. But the foundation of our lives will become one of hope, and we will increasingly experience a condition of security and joy.

My mentor, Josei Toda, once explained this as follows:

"Even if you fall ill, simply have the attitude, 'I'm all right. I know that if I chant to the Gohonzon, I will get well.' Isn't the world of Buddhahood a state of life in which we can live with total peace of mind? That said, however, given that the nine worlds are inherent in the world of Buddhahood, we might still occasionally become angry or have to deal with problems. Therefore, enjoying total peace of mind doesn't mean that we have to renounce anger or some such thing. When something worrying happens, it's only natural to be worried. But in the innermost depths of our lives, we will have a profound sense of security. This is what it means to be a Buddha.

"If we can regard life itself as an absolute joy, isn't that being a Buddha? Doesn't that mean attaining the same life state as the Daishonin? Even when faced with the threat of being beheaded, the Daishonin remained calm and composed. If it had been us in that situation, we'd have been in a state of complete panic! When the Daishonin was exiled to the hostile environment of Sado Island, he continued instructing his disciples on various matters and produced such important writings as 'The Opening of the Eyes' and 'The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind.' If he didn't have unshakable peace of mind, he would never have been able to compose such great treatises under such difficult circumstances."

Our daily practice of gongyo—reciting portions of the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—is a solemn ceremony in which our lives become one with the life of the Buddha. By applying ourselves steadfastly and persistently to this practice for manifesting our inherent Buddhahood, we firmly establish the life state of Buddhahood in our lives so that it is solid and unshakable like the earth. On this foundation, this solid stage, we can freely enact at each moment the drama of the nine worlds.

Moreover, kosen-rufu is the challenge to transform the fundamental life state of society into that of Buddhahood. The key to this lies in increasing the number of those who share our noble aspirations.

When we base ourselves on faith in Nichiren Buddhism, absolutely no effort we make is ever wasted. When we establish Buddhahood as our basic life tendency, we can move toward a future of hope while creating positive value from all our activities in the nine worlds, both past and present. In fact, all of our hardships and struggles in the nine worlds become the nourishment that strengthens the world of Buddhahood in our lives.

In accord with the Buddhist principle that "earthly desires lead to enlightenment," sufferings (earthly desires, or the deluded impulses of the nine worlds) all become the "firewood" or fuel for gaining happiness (enlightenment, or the world of Buddhahood). This is similar to how our bodies digest food and turn it into energy.

A Buddha who has no connection to the actual sufferings of the nine worlds is not a genuine Buddha—namely, one who embodies the mutual possession of the Ten Worlds. This is the essential message of the "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra.

The world of Buddhahood can also be described as a state of life where one willingly takes on even hellish suffering. This is the world of hell contained in the world of Buddhahood. It is characterized by empathy and hardships deliberately taken on for the happiness and welfare of others, and arises from a sense of responsibility and compassion. Courageously taking on problems and sufferings for the sake of others strengthens the world of Buddhahood in our lives.

Because of the principle of the "mutual possession of the Ten Worlds," our Buddhist practice enables us to live true to ourselves. Buddhist teachings that lack this principle reject the nine worlds, seeking to reach the state of Buddhahood by breaking free of these lower states. But this approach actually detracts from one's humanity. It means a life of prohibitions and proscriptions, of constant fault-finding and self-negation, and leads ultimately to "reducing the body to ashes and annihilating consciousness."

Of course, self-reflection and self-control are important, but taken to the extreme they can turn one into a rigid, narrow-minded person who barely knows what it means to be alive.

This may be a case of the remedy being worse than the disease. A better approach more often is to overlook people's minor shortcomings, and instead give them hope and purpose so they can move forward positively. By living in this way with vibrant self-confidence, a person's faults will naturally recede and transform. For instance, the fault of impatience might turn into the virtue of energetic action.

This is true of our own lives, and applies to fostering others as well. The key is to be true to oneself, without trying to impress others or to be something we're not. We're all human; at times we laugh, at times we cry. We get angry, and we become confused.

As ordinary people, just as we are, when we commit ourselves on the deepest level to kosen-rufu, the state of Buddhahood becomes our basic life tendency.

We should allow ourselves to be angry when anger is called for, to worry when there is something we need to worry about, to laugh when something is funny, and to enjoy what is enjoyable. The Daishonin says: "Suffer what there is to suffer, enjoy what there is to enjoy." Living this way each day, with vitality and joy, we move dynamically toward the goal of absolute happiness for ourselves and others.

This was from The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, volume 4, published in Japanese in December 1998.

Section 2.8: You Are All Noble Buddhas

President Ikeda's novels The Human Revolution and The New Human Revolution depict the true history of the Soka Gakkai spirit, their protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto representing President Ikeda himself. In this excerpt from The New Human Revolution, Shin'ichi as Soka Gakkai president gives guidance at an informal meeting with members during a visit to Mie Prefecture in April 1978. He stresses that each individual is a noble Buddha with an incredibly precious mission.

The Soka Gakkai is a realm of faith. It starts and ends with faith. The key is to look at everything through the eyes of faith.

What is faith? It is having absolute conviction that all things are part of your own life and being, that you embody the Mystic Law and are a Buddha. Nichiren Daishonin writes: "You must never think that any of the eighty thousand sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha's lifetime or any of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions and three existences are outside yourself."

Believe that the boundless life state of Buddhahood resides within you, earnestly chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, and polish your life—this, the Daishonin teaches, is the only way to free ourselves from suffering and delusion. You are all originally Buddhas. Believe in yourself. There's no need to compare yourself to others and let that determine your happiness.

The path to establishing an indestructible state of absolute happiness exists nowhere but in polishing your own life and bringing forth the Buddha nature inside you.

If you can't believe you embody the Mystic Law, you'll never have self-confidence in the truest sense of the word, and you'll always be searching for the path to happiness outside yourself.

What happens then? You'll end up being swayed by people's opinions and other external circumstances, happy one minute and sad the next. You'll compare yourself to others in all areas—social status or position, economic standing, personality, looks, and so on. When you think you're a bit better than someone, you'll feel superior. You'll become conceited, unable to see yourself objectively. But the moment you think you're lacking, you'll feel depressed, worthless, and powerless.

Moreover, if you're too concerned about what others think of you, you'll be hurt and offended by even the most inconsequential words or actions. You'll hate and resent these people for saying something "terrible" about you, not appreciating you, or showing no compassion.

Some people worry so much about others' opinions that they'll go to any lengths to win their favor.

The fundamental cause of resentment is being deluded about the true nature of your life. Unable, though you practice Nichiren Buddhism, to really believe you are a treasure tower and a Buddha, you seek happiness outside. This provides an opening for devilish influences.

You are all magnificent, noble Buddhas. You are people with an incredibly precious mission. Don't compare yourselves to others. Value and accept yourselves for who you are and always strive to develop your own unique potential.

And just as each one of you is a Buddha, so is everyone else around you. That's why it's important to respect and treasure your fellow members to the utmost. That is the key to the unity of the Soka Gakkai.

This was from The New Human Revolution, volume 29, "Rikiso" (Sprinting Forward) chapter.
