Chapter 8: Facing Illness

Section 8.1: Struggling with Illness Can Forge Invincible Spiritual Strength

Birth, aging, sickness, and death are challenges everyone must face. We are all likely to confront the challenge of illness at some time in our lives. Buddhism regards illness not as something to be feared but as an opportunity for the human revolution that leads to attaining the life state of Buddhahood. Through Buddhism, we are able to transform illness into a force for victory in life.

In this chapter, we explore President Ikeda's guidance on the subject of birth, aging, sickness, and death based on Buddhism.

Buddhism recognizes illness as one of the fundamental sufferings that human beings experience, one of the four sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death. In seeking a solution to illness, both Buddhism and medical science share a common goal. Both ask what is necessary for people to enjoy vibrant mental and physical well-being and to lead fulfilling lives.

Health is not simply the absence of illness. A truly healthy life is creative, one in which we keep challenging something, creating something, and moving forward to expand our horizons as long as we live.

My mentor, second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda, said that people today make two basic mistakes: they confuse knowledge with wisdom and wrongly associate sickness with death.

Knowledge and wisdom are not the same. The relationship between the two can be discussed from many perspectives.

Speaking very generally, we can say that medical science combats illness through knowledge. Buddhism, on the other hand, develops human wisdom so that we may balance our lives and strengthen our life force. By doing so, we can use medical knowledge as an aid in the process of healing ourselves.

It is therefore foolish to ignore or reject medical science. To do so on religious grounds would amount to fanaticism. We need to make intelligent use of medical knowledge to conquer illness, and Buddhism can help us bring forth the wisdom to do that effectively.

Wisdom is essential for both health and long life. It is also a vital ingredient for happiness. If we wish to create an age in which people enjoy good health, we must first create an age that is founded on wisdom.

As for the relationship between sickness and death, illness does not necessarily lead to death. Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Illness gives rise to the resolve to attain the way" (WND-1, 937). Just as he says, illness can motivate us to take stock of ourselves, to reflect on the essence of life and our way of living. Through struggling with illness, we can gain a much fuller understanding of life and forge invincible spiritual strength.

I was a rather sickly child. Later, I also suffered from tuberculosis, and the doctor said I might not reach the age of 30. But that experience allowed me to understand the feelings of those afflicted with poor health. It also made me treasure every single moment, never waste a minute, and live with all my might, doing everything I could while alive.

There are many people with healthy bodies whose lives are ailing. And there are also those who suffer from physical illness but whose lives are vibrant. As long as we are alive, we are bound to experience illness of some kind. That's why having the wisdom to know how to deal successfully with illness is so important.

From Kenko no chie, meaning The Art of Health, published in Japanese in February 1997.

Section 8.2: Transforming the Sufferings of Birth, Aging, Sickness, and Death

President Ikeda encourages members to resolve never to be defeated by illness and to strive for a life of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity.

Illness is one of the four universal sufferings that no one can escape. In that sense, our entire lives are a battle against illness, so there's no need to fear it. By the same token, we shouldn't make light of illness. It's important to quickly take practical measures to get well.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Could not this illness... be the Buddha's design, because the Vimalakirti and Nirvana sutras both teach that sick people will surely attain Buddhahood? Illness gives rise to the resolve to attain the way" (WND-1, 937).

We can use the suffering of illness as fuel to strengthen our faith and also to develop a deeper and more expansive state of life. In the light of the Mystic Law and viewed from the perspective of eternity, the struggle against illness is a test to enable us to attain happiness and victory.

True health is found in a positive attitude toward life that refuses to be defeated by anything.

The sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death can be transformed into a winning life imbued with the four noble virtues of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity. This is the life of Soka, or value creation.

Falling ill is not a form of failure or defeat. It doesn't happen because our faith is weak. When the suffering of illness occurs amid our efforts for kosen-rufu, it is the working of devilish influences trying to obstruct our attainment of Buddhahood. As such, we mustn't let illness intimidate us. The Daishonin teaches us how to bring forth courage to face illness and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

When you experience illness, the important thing is to rouse even stronger faith. Keep chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with the determination to make this illness an opportunity to demonstrate the tremendous power of faith and achieve truly amazing growth as a human being.

The Daishonin writes: "Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is like the roar of a lion. What sickness can therefore be an obstacle?" (WND-1, 412).

The Mystic Law is the ultimate source of power for overcoming the sufferings of illness. It is the best of all medicines for our life. Mr. Toda often used to say: "The human body is one big pharmaceutical factory."

If you are suffering from illness, it is important to keep chanting earnestly and persistently for the treatment you are now receiving to yield its greatest possible effectiveness and for the great life force of the Buddha to manifest itself in your body and vanquish the devil of illness. If you base your struggle with illness on faith in the Mystic Law, you can definitely transform all poison into medicine.

The Daishonin teaches: "Myo of myoho, the Mystic Law, means to revive" (WND-1, 149).

In a letter to a follower with a sick family member, he says: "[This illness] cannot be the work of demons. Probably the ten demon daughters, who are protective deities in Buddhism, are testing the strength of your faith" (WND-1, 899). In other words, the benevolent forces of the universe cannot fail to protect the practitioners of the Mystic Law. He is telling the family: "You can overcome this!"

Note on terminology: The ten demon daughters are the ten female protective deities who appear in the "Dharani" (26th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra as the "daughters of rakshasa demons" or the "ten rakshasa daughters." They vow to the Buddha to guard and protect the sutra's practitioners.

In another letter, the Daishonin writes: "The sun breaks through the pitch-black dark," and "The Lotus Sutra is compared to the sun" (WND-1, 315). As Soka Gakkai members who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and base our lives on the Mystic Law, a bright sun of hope shines ever in our hearts. We can dispel all darkness and cast off even the heaviest chains of karma.

In struggling against illness for both ourselves and others, we can attain a state of shining health.

Chant daimoku, trusting in the power of the Gohonzon. Strive fearlessly and patiently. Refuse to accept defeat. Never retreat a single step. In the end, you are certain to triumph!

Concerning emotional or psychological disorders, such as depression: Life is long, and there is no need to rush things. I think it's prudent in the case of psychological disorders to seek professional advice and take time to get proper care and treatment. Everyone's situation is different. There is no universal prescription or panacea. But there is one point I wish to emphasize: I can affirm that none of you who uphold the Mystic Law is destined to be unhappy.

We should warmly support and watch over those struggling with mental health issues, keeping their long-term welfare always in mind, and also sincerely encourage their family members. Those caring for others with emotional or psychological disorders face a great challenge, too, and they should try to find creative ways to take a break and refresh themselves.

Showing care and support for those suffering from emotional illnesses will lead to the cultivation of a truly deep spirit of compassion and also to the creation of a richly humanistic society.

Those who have experienced great suffering can develop into outstanding people. Those who have undergone painful trials can help many others. Such individuals have an important mission. This is the teaching of Nichiren Buddhism and the bodhisattva way of life.

Mr. Toda remarked: "Outwardly, we might look like a 'Bodhisattva Poverty' or 'Bodhisattva Sickness,' but that is merely a role we're playing in the drama of life. We are in fact bona fide Bodhisattvas of the Earth!" The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law in the Latter Day of the Law. He also said: "People who have battled serious illness really understand the profundity of life."

Everything in life has a meaning.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Even the jewels and treasures that fill the major world system are no substitute for life" (WND-1, 1019). Though one may be ill, this has no bearing on the inherent nobility, dignity, and beauty of one's life. Everyone, without exception, is an infinitely precious and noble treasure.

From "To My Young Friends, Leaders of a New Age," published in Japanese, July 25-27, 2012.

Section 8.4: Turning Illness into an Impetus for Growth

Referring to Nichiren Daishonin's writings, President Ikeda affirms that Buddhism enables us to make illness into a positive value as an opportunity to achieve absolute happiness.

It is said that those who overcome a major illness deeply savor the taste of life. In Nichiren Buddhism, illness is regarded as an impetus for achieving the supreme objective of Buddhahood. The misfortune of a severe illness can become the stepping stone to a state of absolute happiness that endures for all eternity.

A famous passage from the Daishonin's writings states: "Could not this illness of your husband's be the Buddha's design, because the Vimalakirti and Nirvana sutras both teach that sick people will surely attain Buddhahood? Illness gives rise to the resolve to attain the way" (WND-1, 937). With these words, the Daishonin warmly encourages a female follower whose husband is suffering from illness. This guidance conveys his boundless and freely flowing wisdom and compassion.

It is certainly true that a painful illness can motivate us to begin chanting daimoku more earnestly and abundantly than usual. Such times of suffering are precisely when we need to make the flame of our faith burn higher than ever. What matters is whether we make our illness a starting point for embarking on a course to greater happiness, or the beginning of a decline toward misery.

The power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo not only produces a strong life force to help us overcome illness, but also transforms the karma in the depths of our being. It elevates our inner "self" to the world of Buddhahood and enables us to attain immeasurable good fortune that leads to an indestructible state of absolute happiness.

We can then brilliantly transform the negative condition of illness beyond the neutral condition of health into a more expansive, positive condition, moving our lives in the direction of happiness. What enables us to draw forth that power is indomitable faith, faith that can courageously turn even adversity into a springboard for tremendous growth.

Of course, faith cannot immediately cure every kind of illness. Each person has their own karma, and the strength of each person's faith also differs. In addition, a struggle with illness can have a variety of profound meanings that cannot be fathomed by ordinary wisdom.

As long as we have strong faith, however, there is not the slightest doubt that we can transform our condition in the direction of health, happiness, and Buddhahood. From the perspective of life existing throughout the three existences of past, present, and future, we can move our life in the best possible direction, in the direction of happiness.

It is important to continue chanting earnestly and to keep our passionate commitment to kosen-rufu burning brightly in our hearts as long as we live. Such strong, thoroughly forged determination in faith is the primary force for serenely overcoming the sufferings of birth and death.

From a speech at a Wakayama Prefecture commemorative general meeting, Wakayama, March 24, 1988.

Section 8.5: Falling Ill Is Not a Sign of Defeat

Illness is not a sign of defeat or misfortune. For those dedicated to the Mystic Law, the drama of birth, aging, sickness, and death is also the joyous stage for a life of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity.

Mr. Toda said: "It is natural for us to fall ill. At the same time, we possess within us the power to cure our own illness." This was a message he often shared.

Nichiren Daishonin states that birth, aging, sickness, and death are "the aspect or characteristics of the threefold world" (OTT, 127). The threefold world is the world of unenlightened beings who transmigrate within the six paths. It consists of the world of desire, the world of form, and the world of formlessness. In a general sense, it refers to the saha world in which we dwell. Illness itself is just one aspect of human life. Falling ill is by no means a sign of defeat in life. Moreover, it would be utterly lacking in compassion to presume that someone's faith is weak simply because they have gotten sick. Offering heartfelt encouragement to those who are battling illness is an expression of genuine caring. Whenever one of his followers fell ill, the Daishonin would encourage that person with all his heart and being.

The "lion's roar" of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the ultimate weapon for battling illness. We must absolutely never forget the Daishonin's statement "Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is like the roar of a lion. What sickness can therefore be an obstacle?" (WND-1, 412).

To use the struggle against illness to develop an even greater sense of fulfillment and inner richness is to lead a life of value creation. That is why it is so important to have the "heart of a lion king" with which to fight through to the end against all obstacles. We must possess an indomitable and unyielding spirit. It is for this very reason that we need to exert ourselves in faith and practice every day, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for both ourselves and others, and forge a strong determination grounded in faith that will remain steadfast and unwavering in the face of any attack by the devil of illness.

When the lay nun Toki, the wife of Toki Jonin, became seriously ill, the Daishonin repeatedly sent her letters of encouragement, seeking to impart hope and strength. "Do not burden your mind with grief" (WND-1, 656), he tells her. The important thing is to have a fighting spirit, to possess the spirit of a votary of the Lotus Sutra. He also says: "Take care of yourself" (WND-1, 656). It is vital that we take practical steps toward restoring our health when we are ill.

No one intends from the outset to be defeated by illness. But should a particular illness interfere with our daily activities or our work, or cause us to lose courage and self-confidence, we may gradually be overtaken by despair. In the case of the lay nun Toki, she may have begun to feel a sense of resignation because of her slow recovery. The Daishonin urges her to summon the resolve to live out her life to the fullest.

Of course, there are people who have strong faith but who die young. However, there is definitely some profound meaning behind this. The value of one's life is not determined by the number of years one has lived. The Daishonin asserts: "It is better to live a single day with honor than to live to 120 and die in disgrace" (WND-1, 851).

The Daishonin speaks of "the treasure of faith" (WND-1, 955), emphasizing to the lay nun Toki the importance of rousing the will to go on living, or, we might say, enthusiasm for life. He writes: "Life is the most precious of all treasures. Even one extra day of life is worth more than ten million ryo of gold... So you must hasten to accumulate the treasure of faith and quickly conquer your illness." A ryo was a unit of weight in ancient Japan equivalent to about 37.5 grams.

For us, each day of life is a day that we can directly contribute to kosen-rufu; our efforts each day lead directly to the fulfillment of the great vow for kosen-rufu. Therefore, we absolutely must not be defeated by illness or any other obstacle.

The Daishonin says that illness is "the Buddha's design," because it can spur us to arouse the "resolve to attain the way" (WND-1, 937).

The ultimate purpose for living long and healthy lives is so that we can take compassionate action to benefit others who are struggling amid the realities of society. It is only natural, of course, that we chant for good health and longevity for our own sakes as well. Needless to say, to ruin one's health on account of immoderate habits or plain neglect runs entirely counter to a way of life of value creation.

We have to exercise wisdom in our daily lives, for example, taking time to refresh ourselves and resting if we become fatigued. Good health is something we have to secure for ourselves by acting with prudence and good sense. Health is the badge of honor of the wise.

What is the purpose of striving for good health and longevity? It is so that we can use our lives to the fullest to work for the sake of the Law, for the happiness and welfare of our families, our fellow members, and our fellow human beings, and to accomplish our individual missions and realize the great vow for kosen-rufu.

It is vital therefore that we actively take on the challenges of the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death amid our efforts for kosen-rufu. Doing so is actual proof that the four noble virtues of Buddhahood, eternity, happiness, true self, and purity, exist eternally within us.

The sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death are not causes for lamenting. Rather, they together form the brilliant stage of life upon which we enact a drama that resounds with the triumphant strains of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity. Through this drama of birth, aging, sickness, and death, we perform a joyous play of human victory.

From The World of Nichiren Daishonin's Writings, volume 3, published in Japanese in March 2005.

Section 8.6: The Buddhist View of Illness

In this excerpt from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) encourages men's division members suffering from poor health during a visit to Kansai.

Shin'ichi said: "The 'Life Span' (16th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra teaches the principle of prolonging one's life through faith. This is based on the passage in the 'Life Span' chapter that reads: 'We beg you to cure us and let us live out our lives!' This is in the section that explains the parable of the outstanding physician, who gives 'good medicine' to his children who have 'drunk poison,' and who implore him to cure their illness. Through taking this good medicine, that is, embracing faith in the wonderful Law of the Lotus Sutra, they are cured and able to enjoy many more years of life. In other words, through our Buddhist practice, we can extend how long we live. If we continue to strive with strong faith in the Mystic Law, there is no illness that we cannot surmount. Please chant abundantly and live a long, healthy life!

"In discussing the origins of illness, the Daishonin cites a passage from T'ien-t'ai's Great Concentration and Insight, which states: 'There are six causes of illness: (1) disharmony of the four elements; (2) improper eating or drinking; (3) inappropriate practice of seated meditation; (4) attack by demons; (5) the work of devils; and (6) the effects of karma' (WND-1, 631)."

Let us look at these points in closer detail.

Listed as the first cause of illness is "disharmony of the four elements." The four elements are earth, water, fire, and wind. According to traditional Eastern thought, nature and all things in the universe, including the human body, are made up of these four elements. "Disharmony of the four elements" refers to unseasonable weather and other conditions of discord in the natural world, which have a powerful influence on the human body and can cause various illnesses.

The second and third causes of illness, "improper eating or drinking" and "inappropriate practice of seated meditation," refer to a lack of control in one's dietary habits and other aspects of day-to-day living. When our daily lives fall out of rhythm, our diet may suffer. Also, insufficient sleep and exercise may cause disorders in our internal organs, muscles, or nervous system. The seated meditation referred to here is an ancient Indian practice for ordering the mind and body. T'ien-t'ai held that this practice, when improperly done or carried to an extreme, could cause illness.

The "demons" in number four, "attack by demons," refer to external causes. These include microorganisms, such as bacteria and viruses, as well as the stress we experience in our daily lives.

Number five, "the work of devils," indicates the various inner impulses and desires that disrupt the healthy functioning of our minds and bodies. Afflictions that prevent us from practicing Buddhism also arise from the workings of such negative functions.

Number six, "the work of karma," refers to causes that derive from the inner depths of our lives. This indicates sickness that stems from distortions or deeply rooted tendencies in our lives. Buddhism views such distortions as karma. The word karma is Sanskrit for "action." Our every action, what we think, say, and do, is engraved in our lives. Good actions produce good, fortunate results, and bad actions produce bad, unfortunate results.

The origins of illness are divided into these six different categories, but in actuality, many illnesses have overlapping causes. In the case of influenza, for example, the cause is a virus. This could be looked at as an "attack by demons." Infection can, however, be triggered by changeable weather, in other words, by "disharmony of the four elements." In addition, a poor physical condition brought about by an unhealthy lifestyle, "improper eating and drinking," can be a contributing factor. Negative functions may also be at work in the depths of one's life to keep one from engaging in Buddhist practice, and there are also cases when karma may be an important consideration.

Shin'ichi went on to give a detailed explanation of the six causes of illness in light of the Daishonin's writings: "In short, one of the first steps in avoiding illness is taking care to dress appropriately for the weather and environment. Leading a well-balanced life, not overindulging in food or drink, and getting enough sleep and exercise are all vital, too.

"In this way, we can avoid the first three causes of illness. Faith means employing the wisdom to do so. And with the help of medical science, we can also avoid the fourth cause of illness, which includes such things as germs and viruses. But no matter what the sickness, the speed with which we recover depends upon our life force. And faith is the wellspring of that life force.

"At the same time, if the root cause of an illness is the work of negative functions or the effect of karma, then even the best efforts of medical science alone cannot bring about a cure. It is only through strong faith in the Gohonzon that we can defeat such negative functions in our life and transform our karma."

The following is in response to a diabetic man taking daily insulin injections. The man said that he had lost all hope in life because his doctor has told him he would never be cured.

Shin'ichi said: "If you exert yourself wholeheartedly in faith, your life will be filled with hope, supreme happiness, and fulfillment, even if you have a chronic illness. The Daishonin writes: 'Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is like the roar of a lion. What sickness can therefore be an obstacle?' (WND-1, 412). Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a lion's roar. A lion's roar will send even the fiercest animals running. In the same way, when faced with chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, no ailment can be an obstacle to one's happiness or to kosen-rufu.

"People today have been described as being only 'half-healthy,' meaning that we are all afflicted with some kind of illness and that our physical health will decline as we age. But is sickness necessarily the cause of unhappiness? Absolutely not. It is being defeated by illness and losing hope that makes us unhappy. We become unhappy when we forget our mission to strive for kosen-rufu.

"There are many people with perfectly healthy bodies who are unhappy because they are ailing spiritually. On the other hand, there are many Soka Gakkai members who, while struggling with illness or disability, are not only genuinely happy but also work for the happiness of others.

"At life's most fundamental level, health and sickness are one. There are times when we manifest a healthy condition and times when we manifest illness. The two conditions are interconnected. Thus, by making earnest efforts in faith and fighting against illness, we can establish a state of genuine health both mentally and physically.

"It may be hard to have to take insulin injections for the rest of your life. But if you think about it, eating and sleeping are also things we must do every day to live. Try to view your injections as just one more thing that's been added to your daily routine. It won't do any good to let it get you down.

"I hope you will live in such a way that others struggling with the same condition will marvel and say: 'Look how energetic he is, despite his diabetes!' 'Look at what a long life he is enjoying!' 'Look how happy he is!' If you are able to do that, you will be a brilliant example of the power of Buddhism. That is your mission in life. Don't allow yourself to be defeated. Keep going! Never give up!"

Shin'ichi then addressed all present, saying: "The Daishonin will not fail to protect those who dedicate their lives to kosen-rufu. When his disciple Nanjo Tokimitsu was ill, the Daishonin sent him a letter in which he wrote: 'You demons, by making this man suffer, are you trying to swallow a sword point first, or embrace a raging fire, or become the archenemy of the Buddhas of the ten directions in the three existences?' (WND-1, 1109). In sternly rebuking the devilish functions causing his disciple to suffer, the Daishonin protected him. We are all embraced by this great conviction and compassion of the Daishonin.

"I hope all of you will also be filled with certainty and indomitable resolve not to be defeated by those negative forces. Muster your courage. I also used to suffer from poor health and a doctor said I probably wouldn't make it to age 30. But I'm strong and healthy now and able to handle the most demanding of schedules. You can all become healthy, too!"

From The New Human Revolution, volume 10, "Crown Champions" chapter.

Section 8.7: "Faith" Means to Continue to Believe until the Very End

This story of a young child who overcame the suffering of illness and the fear of death to create an inspiring drama shows us that no matter how ill we may be, through strong faith we can triumph in life in the end.

The law of life and death is universal, permeating the entire universe. But it manifests itself in distinct, unique ways that are different from person to person. It is very complex, involving innumerable factors.

Buddhism teaches that our lives are governed to a large extent by our karma, which is formed by our actions in past lifetimes. We are subject to the effects of immutable karma, or fixed karma, which determines how long we live and the basic course of our lives. We are also subject to the effects of mutable karma, or unfixed karma, which we may or may not experience in this lifetime. If we compare these two types of karma to sickness, immutable karma is like a serious or even fatal disease, while mutable karma is like a relatively minor illness, such as a cold.

The energy, both positive and negative, that is engraved in our lives through our actions does not disappear at death. It continues into our next existence, carried over in a way we might think of as resembling the law of the conservation of energy in physics.

But Nichiren Buddhism teaches that we can change all such karma. We can transform even fixed karma, or rather, we must do so. No matter what sufferings or hardships we may encounter, we must live out our lives fully, fighting our hardest until we triumph. Those who win in the end are true victors in life.

Victory is not decided halfway through. If we win in the end, we can look back on everything in our life up to that moment and realize that it all had meaning. But if we are defeated in the end, everything will have been meaningless, no matter how smoothly things may have been going until then.

If members persevere with strong faith to the very end, they will be victorious, even if they should die from illness. There are many who, while suffering from illness, have chanted for kosen-rufu and the happiness of others and continued to reach out to encourage those around them right up to the very moment of death. Their lives and their bravery in the face of death have given courage and inspiration to countless others. Such people will quickly be reborn with healthy bodies.

I knew a young girl who was diagnosed with a brain tumor at age 11 and died at 14. But throughout her illness, she was always happy and bright. She even cheered up the adults in the hospital with her sunny, positive presence. No doubt her illness caused her terrible pain, but she continued to chant daimoku and to encourage others.

When she was near death, she said to one of her last visitors: "I don't care about my illness anymore. I've stopped chanting for myself. There are so many others worse off than me. I'm chanting with all my heart that they will take faith as soon as possible and find out for themselves just how wonderful the Gohonzon is."

To her parents, she said brightly: "What if this had happened to you, Dad? We'd be in terrible trouble! And it would be just as bad if it had happened to you, Mom. And if it had happened to my little brother, I'm sure he wouldn't have been able to handle it. I'm glad that it happened to me instead of any of you... I'm sure this is the result of a promise I made before I was born. If my life can somehow touch and inspire those who know me, I will be happy."

Hearing of this girl's struggle with illness, I sent her a bouquet of roses. I also sent her a Japanese fan on which I had written the words, "Light of Happiness," and a photograph I had taken of a field of irises in bloom. I heard that she was thrilled when she received them.

To those around her, she left the words: "Faith means to continue to believe until the very end." And she demonstrated those words with her own life.

At her funeral, a long line of people came to pay their respects. In her brief 14 years, she had told over a thousand people of the greatness of the Mystic Law.

She won. That's what I believe. Everything that happened to her had meaning. Or rather, through her struggle, she gave meaning to her suffering.

She said that her illness was the result of a promise she had made in her past lifetime. Buddhism teaches the concept of "voluntarily assuming the appropriate karma." This refers to bodhisattvas who, though qualified to receive the pure rewards of Buddhist practice, relinquish them and make a vow to be reborn in an impure world in order to save living beings. They spread the Mystic Law while undergoing the same sufferings as those born in the evil world due to karma. This is the bodhisattva way of life.

If those who embrace the Mystic Law were blessed with every form of happiness from the start, no one would ever come to know how powerful and effective Nichiren Buddhism is. That's why we voluntarily choose to be born with problems and suffering so that we can show others what human revolution looks like. It is as if we are performing a part in a play, a great drama.

From Discussions on Youth II, published in Japanese in September 2000.

Section 8.8: "Laugh Off the Devil of Illness"

The example of a women's division member who triumphed brilliantly over illness teaches the importance of never losing hope and employing strong faith to change winter into spring.

One day after a women's division meeting, I learned that a woman I knew well was going to be hospitalized. I had known her from her student days, and I also knew her parents.

She had developed a lump under her chin and gone to see the doctor about it. He examined her and, though a precise diagnosis would have to wait until further tests, he thought it was serious. She had always been in the best of health and very energetic and active, so this news surprised me. I could imagine how unsettling it must have been for her.

I immediately composed a poem as a message of encouragement and had someone convey it to her verbally:

Confidently live out your life and triumph over all, laughing off the devil of illness to become a queen of longevity.

The next day, I inscribed the poem on a decorative card and sent it to her.

I sent another message to her the day before she was hospitalized: "Don't worry. Be confident. My wife and I are chanting for you. Put your mind at ease, and whatever you find out, don't let yourself be intimidated by illness. You mustn't let yourself be defeated. Again, there's nothing to worry about. Take care."

I continued to send her messages the following day, the day she was hospitalized, and the day after that. She was undergoing several days of tests, so I wanted to give her as much encouragement as I could. I told her: "Stay cheerful. Remember, from the standpoint of the eternity of life, we are 'Buddhas in life' and 'Buddhas in death' (cf. WND-1, 456). It's a pity to make life a painful affair. Remain positive and upbeat, no matter what."

I had a women's division member go in my stead to visit her at the hospital. She was apparently in high spirits, happy to have received my messages, and chanting with a firm determination to beat the devil of illness.

Two weeks later, the day before she was to receive the results of her tests, I sent her another message, this time asking someone to convey it by phone: "How are you doing? I am chanting in earnest for you, so everything will be fine. You will get better. This encounter with illness will deepen your prayers and become a source of strength as a personal experience in faith."

The test results showed that she had cancer, a malignant lymphoma. She was also found to have a tumor about the size of a fist deep in her abdomen. Surgery was not possible, so she would have to undergo chemotherapy. This would involve one round of chemotherapy a month for 10 months. For the first two or three months she would have to remain in hospital, but after that, she could receive treatment as an outpatient.

She said that her doctors told her she would suffer severe side effects from the chemotherapy, including hair loss, lack of appetite, and nausea.

Because she hadn't yet experienced any symptoms of pain or discomfort, this discussion of her treatment drove home to her for the first time that she was dealing with something life-threatening.

The news of her illness was a great shock for her elderly parents and the rest of her family. They must have been distressed and worried beyond imagination.

She sent me a letter expressing her determination in which she wrote: "Because of your constant encouragement, I have been able to accept my diagnosis calmly. I will follow your advice to 'laugh off the devil of illness,' determined to fight on cheerfully and win."

A person of firm resolve is strong. Resolute prayer strengthens our life force.

Everyone in her hospital ward was suffering from similar illnesses. Some of them openly expressed their misery and said they would rather die than continue the harsh treatments. Observing their plight, she was well aware of the tough battle that lay ahead of her. It was only natural that one might feel anxious and afraid in such a situation. But she decided to face this challenge with unflinching courage.

Strangely, she experienced no pain or discomfort after her first chemotherapy treatment. I was very happy to hear her first joyous report.

Her hair soon began to fall out, but her second treatment also went well, and she was allowed to leave the hospital. Her appetite remained good, and she even gained weight. Not only that, the tumor in her stomach shrunk to one-third its original size.

I received that report while I was on a visit to Russia. I immediately sent her a message congratulating her and telling her not to overexert herself.

Praying for her to make a full recovery, my wife also wrote her a postcard saying: "You have achieved victory in the first stage. Please continue to be patient and take things slowly until you achieve complete victory. Remember, laugh off the devil of illness!"

After several more months of outpatient treatment, she completed her chemotherapy. The tumor in her stomach had almost completely disappeared.

She had to be careful over that nearly one-year period, because the chemotherapy had weakened her immune system. But aside from losing her hair, she experienced no painful side effects. She even returned to work. She was so cheerful throughout that no one would ever have imagined she was ill unless she told them. Her doctor, too, was genuinely surprised.

I received a letter from her that was filled with joy and appreciation. I had been kept well informed of her progress, and I was very happy to hear of the successful outcome of her battle with illness. She wrote that she had constantly reminded herself of my advice to "laugh off the devil of illness," which she had found a great source of encouragement and strength.

She is now even more active than she was before her illness, and a growing number of people come to her for advice about dealing with health problems, because they know that she successfully overcame a serious illness.

She sincerely shares her experience with each of them and encourages them wholeheartedly. Nothing provides greater reassurance and hope than words of encouragement brimming with conviction based on personal experience.

Overcoming illness is profoundly meaningful, not only in terms of one's own well-being, but also because it enables one to inspire and help many others who are going through similar struggles.

All sorts of things happen in life. It is a continuous series of changes. What matters in the end is never to be defeated by anything, to keep fighting and not lose hope.

Life is a struggle against our inner tendencies to give up when things are tough, to compromise and accept less. Please win in the struggle with yourself, vowing not to give up, not to be defeated.

We mustn't avoid difficulties. We must win out over our problems and sufferings. It is up to us to create our own treasures through our own efforts. "I am happy. I have won!" Those who can create value in life so that they can say this with confidence are people who shine with true brilliance and character.

From Haha no uta, meaning Ode to Mothers, published in Japanese in August 1997.

Section 8.9: Four Mottoes for Good Health

President Ikeda proposes four guidelines for good health based on the perspective of Buddhism and faith.

I'd like to speak to you a little about health.

Once, when I was talking with members of the Kansai Doctors Division and young women's division Nurses Group, I proposed four mottoes for leading a healthy life. They were just some simple personal thoughts I shared with the members, based on the perspective of Buddhism and faith. The doctors and nurses I was speaking with, however, agreed that my advice was also medically sound.

The four mottoes are: (1) Do an invigorating gongyo, (2) Lead a balanced and productive lifestyle, (3) Contribute to the welfare of others, and (4) Eat wisely.

Medically speaking, such factors as diet, exercise, sleep, and stress relief are often mentioned as fundamental to good health, and all of those basic elements are included in the four mottoes I suggested.

On the first motto, do an invigorating gongyo: When our gongyo and chanting become sluggish or halfhearted, we feel physically sluggish, too. Many of you can probably relate to this.

The good fortune and benefit we derive through chanting vigorously are immeasurable. Our bodies, hearts, and minds begin to exhibit their limitless latent potential.

Additionally, sitting up straight and breathing deeply is also considered to be very beneficial for one's health from a medical viewpoint. Enhanced respiratory function improves our cardiovascular system.

A member of the Doctors Division also commented that using our voices is an important way of relieving stress. Once people stop using their voices, they tend to age more quickly.

Sitting properly with our palms pressed together as we do gongyo and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is, in every sense, the most solemn and meaningful activity, in accord with the underlying principles governing the universe. Our individual bodies and minds, as the microcosm, are aligned and merged with the fundamental rhythm of the universe, the macrocosm. Day after day, our beings are rejuvenated. This is the first foundation for health and long life.

On the second motto, lead a balanced and productive lifestyle: Sufficient sleep is another important foundation for good health. Not getting enough sleep is like leaving a car's engine constantly running. Eventually, it will malfunction or break down.

Mr. Toda used to say that the sleep we experience before midnight is twice as deep as the sleep after midnight, so we should go to bed as early as we can. This appears to be supported by medical science.

Manage your time wisely, and try to do your gongyo early and get to bed early. That will prepare you for a fresh start the next morning. Developing the wisdom and self-control to put this into practice will benefit your health.

Getting stuck in an unhealthy cycle of staying up late, either out of routine or force of habit, and then oversleeping and waking up without ever feeling refreshed is definitely not putting faith into correct practice in daily life.

Recently, there has been some focus on the benefits of "mini naps," brief naps of five or ten minutes' duration, in promoting health and productivity. The key is to make good use of rest periods during the day so that you can take care of your health.

On the third motto, contribute to the welfare of others: Physical activity is, of course, a crucial factor in improving health. And more particularly, activity in the form of our efforts to contribute to the promotion of Buddhism, the happiness of others, and the good of society are an incredible source of inner revitalization and energy for living vibrantly.

In contrast, if we stop taking action for others, regarding such efforts as a bother, and shut ourselves up in a shell of self-interest and uncaring individualism, then we will find our bodies and minds begin to stagnate, and often grow more susceptible to illness as a result.

Movement is a defining characteristic of animals, including human beings. We need to move. If we aren't active, we are no different than objects of stone or wood. When living beings with the power of motion cease to be active, they begin to decline.

The same is true of water in a river. When the water stops flowing, it becomes cloudy and stagnant. In the realm of the Mystic Law, too, those who have stopped practicing because they found contributing to the welfare of others a chore are people who have allowed the clear water of their faith to become cloudy, causing them to spiritually stagnate.

You, on the other hand, are making noble efforts day and night to contribute to the welfare of others, spreading the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism, encouraging your fellow members, and striving for the development of your communities.

Sometimes you may think: "Wouldn't it be nice to just stay home tonight and relax and watch TV?" But in joyfully taking action for the happiness of others and your fellow members, you are leading lives infinitely more fulfilling and worthwhile.

We are said to live in a stressful society today. Our environment is filled with potential causes of stress.

In a certain respect, stress can be described as an attack on our spirits from outside. We need to fight back against it. If we remain still, we will be overwhelmed by its pressure, which will destroy us both physically and mentally.

One effective response to stress is to meet it by stepping forward and taking action. In that sense, our actions based on faith in the Gohonzon are actions for reviving and reinvigorating ourselves in perfect accord with the law of life.

I have spoken many times of the importance of walking. It is said that a good way to get regular exercise is to walk ten thousand steps a day.

Some say that aging starts when our legs begin to give out. Every step we take for our Soka Gakkai activities is hugely beneficial in terms of maintaining strength and promoting health.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "If one lights a fire for others, one will brighten one's own way" (WND-2, 1060).

Contributing to the welfare of others, imparting the light of hope to those around us, also brightens our own life with fresh hope and makes it shine with good fortune and benefit.

On the fourth motto, eat wisely: Overeating can lead to obesity. The Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai of China listed improper eating or drinking as a cause of illness (cf. WND-1, 631). How do we correct unbalanced eating habits? How do we effectively control the desire to eat more than we need to? This is where we need to apply wisdom and good sense.

The members of the Doctors Division and Nurses Group voiced specific concern about eating too much late at night, because some members tend to eat meals after attending nighttime Soka Gakkai activities.

Medically speaking, it is desirable to stop eating three hours before going to bed. But if you're really hungry and find that impossible, then it's best to eat vegetables or some other low-calorie food.

You are all very important both for kosen-rufu and for your families. You mustn't put yourselves at risk by becoming too overweight, diabetic, or being afflicted by some other serious illness.

Eating wisely will help you lead pleasant, enjoyable lives. Take responsibility for looking after your own health.

I hope that you will enjoy excellent physical and mental health and lead wonderful lives, adorning this noble existence with victory and happiness as you strive with vibrant faith and in joyful camaraderie.

From a speech at a joint meeting for representatives of Kumamoto and Oita prefectures, Kumamoto, September 28, 1990.
