Chapter 23: Valuing Each Individual

Section 23.1: The Aim of Kosen-rufu Is the Happiness of Each Person

"Valuing each individual" - this simple guiding principle that President Ikeda has repeatedly stressed is where kosen-rufu begins and ends. It encompasses the life-affirming philosophy that each individual's life is more precious than all the treasures of the universe. It shines with the peace philosophy that sees all people as Buddhas. It contains the key to unity grounded in the belief that each person is irreplaceable and possesses unique potential. It also pulses with the compassion and courage not to abandon anyone who is suffering.

This chapter features guidance on the theme of valuing each person presented on various occasions by President Ikeda, who has opened the way for kosen-rufu by consistently doing just that.

Valuing each person is the starting point of the Soka Gakkai. This is also the fundamental spirit of Nichiren Buddhism, which teaches that all people are irreplaceably precious and that everyone in the world innately possesses the noble Buddha nature.

Authoritarian leaders, on the other hand, ignore or denigrate the supreme value of the individual, seeing people only as faceless masses. This is because as far as such individuals are concerned, people are just a means to an end; they are objects, like weapons to be launched or resources to be spent. Power-hungry individuals cleverly manipulate people to feed their own greed and ambition, seeking to gain total control over the whole.

The Soka Gakkai's approach is the exact opposite. This is because the purpose of kosen-rufu is the happiness of each individual. We believe in the infinite potential of every human being, strive to help each person awaken to and reveal that potential, and work to expand the circle of those who share this commitment. This has been the history of our people's movement to this day.

The individual comes first, and then the whole. Everything starts with the individual, and with individuals strongly uniting. Losing sight of this essential point will bring terrible consequences. Anyone who sees the Soka Gakkai and its members as nothing but a tool for advancing some personal or organizational agenda, just like the authoritarian leaders I have described, is wicked to the core.

Everything comes down to the individual. I'd like to reconfirm with you today our basic principle of valuing each person. Let us focus even more attention on each person, doing our utmost to encourage them and foster their precious potential. When each person develops inner strength and wisdom, they can bring forth double, triple, ten times their present capabilities.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, January 6, 2006.

Section 23.2: Everyone Has a Mission

Shakyamuni always treasured each person to the utmost. He compassionately sought to guide them to enlightenment, never giving up on anyone. Citing one such episode, President Ikeda explains that we each have a precious mission that only we can fulfill.

I would like to share a story about an ordinary person who enjoyed a beautiful mentor-disciple relationship with Shakyamuni - a story demonstrating that everyone has a mission in life.

I am referring to the Buddha's disciple Chudapanthaka, who was famous for his bad memory. He was so forgetful that he couldn't even remember his own name. Nichiren Daishonin describes him as "the most forgetful person in the whole continent of Jambudvipa [the entire world]" (WND-2, 657).

Chudapanthaka had joined the community of Shakyamuni's disciples, together with his older brother. But in spite of trying his hardest, he made no progress in his Buddhist practice. Other disciples ridiculed him for his slowness. One day, even his own brother gave up on him and sent him away, telling him that he had no hope of succeeding as a disciple and should just return home. Recalling that day later, Chudapanthaka said that he had stood there discouraged, but still cherishing the hope that there might be some teaching he could master.

Just then, his teacher, Shakyamuni, appeared at his side and gently touched his head. Taking him by the arm, he then led him back to the community. Having been filled with despair, Chudapanthaka must have felt great joy at his teacher's compassionate kindness. Though everyone else had rejected him, his teacher accepted and understood him, believed in him and cared for him. Chudapanthaka found himself filled with new resolve.

Later, Shakyamuni taught Chudapanthaka in a way that enabled him to deepen his life state while joyfully serving his fellow disciples. Chudapanthaka faithfully attended Shakyamuni and continued his sincere efforts, just as his teacher instructed. By doing so, he triumphed.

In the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni predicts that he and his brother will become Buddhas, both with the same name Universal Brightness. Though Chudapanthaka appeared foolish and forgetful, he in fact came to live a wise life of the highest value.

In a letter to one of his disciples in June 1275, the Daishonin writes:

Chudapanthaka was unable to memorize a teaching of fourteen characters even in the space of three years, and yet he attained Buddhahood. Devadatta, on the other hand, had committed to memory sixty thousand teachings but fell into the hell of incessant suffering. These examples exactly represent the situation in the world in this present latter age. Never suppose that they pertain only to other people and not to yourselves (WND-1, 602).

What makes us admirable as practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism? Not background, social position, or inherent abilities, but our tireless efforts to support our fellow members and help them become happy. That dedicated faith and humanity cannot be overlooked. Such a person is the noblest of all - a person who will attain Buddhahood.

From a speech at an SGI general meeting, UK, June 11, 1994.

Section 23.3: Treasuring Each Individual Is the Spirit of the Buddha

The Lotus Sutra presents the parable of the three kinds of medicinal herbs and two kinds of trees, describing how rain falls impartially on all vegetation, enabling each plant to flower and bear fruit in its own unique fashion. President Ikeda explains that this teaching lies at the heart of the Lotus Sutra's humanistic philosophy of treasuring each individual.

In the great work of Buddhist literature that is the Lotus Sutra, the parable of the three kinds of medicinal herbs and two kinds of trees is of particular interest, because it stresses the diversity of living beings. It is the only one of the seven parables of the sutra to articulate this theme. At the same time, it highlights the all-embracing nature of the Buddha's compassion.

The Buddha's compassion is completely impartial; it does not discriminate. The Buddha sees all people as his children and seeks to elevate them to the same state of Buddhahood that he has achieved.

This is not to say that there are no distinctions among people; rather, it affirms that the Buddha does not discriminate among them. In fact, the Buddha fully appreciates their differences. He respects their individuality and wants them to be able to limitlessly express their uniqueness.

The differences among people are not a reason for favoring some and hating others. The Buddha loves, rejoices at, and affirms the individuality of each person. That is the compassion and wisdom of the Buddha.

It is important to realize that the Buddha's preaching is grounded in his recognition of the diversity of human beings.

The Lotus Sutra clarifies the means by which real individuals, with their unique circumstances, personalities, and capacities, can gain enlightenment. It reveals the path to attaining Buddhahood, without ever straying from the reality of each individual's life.

Treasuring each individual is the heart of the people-oriented philosophy, or humanism, of the Lotus Sutra. It is the spirit of the Buddha. The Lotus Sutra's fundamental aim of enabling all people to attain enlightenment also starts with valuing each person, and it can be realized only by practicing this in every aspect of our lives and endeavors.

It is easy to speak abstractly of love for one's fellow human beings or love for humanity, but it can be very challenging to have love and compassion for actual individuals.

A character in one of the Russian author Fyodor Dostoevsky's novels observes: "The more I love mankind in general, the less I love human beings in particular, separately, that is, as individual persons." And a character in another of his novels states: "In an abstract love of humanity it is nearly always only oneself whom one loves."

The Soka Gakkai, maintaining its focus on actual people, has dedicated itself to helping each individual realize absolute happiness. This is a noble legacy that will shine brilliantly in human history.

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, volume 2, published in Japanese in November 1996.

Section 23.5: All Are Supremely Worthy

In "On the Treasure Tower," Nichiren Daishonin writes: "In the Latter Day of the Law, no treasure tower exists other than the figures of the men and women who embrace the Lotus Sutra. It follows, therefore, that whether eminent or humble, high or low, those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo are themselves the treasure tower, and, likewise, are themselves the Thus Come One Many Treasures" (WND-1, 299). Citing this passage, President Ikeda discusses how Nichiren Buddhism, which places utmost value on each person, is a universal teaching that transcends all differences.

You are the treasure tower! You are supremely worthy! That is the message of this passage from "On the Treasure Tower." Founding Soka Gakkai president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi deeply studied this writing and underlined many of its passages. It elucidates the most essential principle of humanism in Nichiren Buddhism, which places the highest value on the individual.

In this writing, the Daishonin extols the dignity and limitless potential of all people and clarifies the means for making the supremely noble Buddha nature inherent in our lives shine.

In "The Emergence of the Treasure Tower" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, a giant jeweled tower suddenly appears before the assembly. My mentor, second president Josei Toda, described this ceremony as follows:

The most wondrous state of Buddhahood is latent within our own lives. The power and quality of this life state are beyond imagination, defying all description. Nevertheless, we can actualize it in our own lives. This ceremony of the "Treasure Tower" chapter explains that we can, in fact, bring forth the latent state of Buddhahood from within our very own lives.

Note on terminology: This refers to the Ceremony in the Air, one of the three assemblies described in the Lotus Sutra, in which the entire gathering is suspended in space above the saha world. The heart of this ceremony is the revelation of the Buddha's original enlightenment in the remote past and the transfer of the essence of the sutra to the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, who are led by Bodhisattva Superior Practices.

The Daishonin tells us that in the Latter Day of the Law, those who uphold the Mystic Law and strive earnestly in their Buddhist practice are themselves the grand and magnificent treasure tower. He says: "No treasure tower exists other than the figures of the men and women who embrace the Lotus Sutra [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo]" (WND-1, 299). By his use of the term "figures," he is emphasizing our lives as they are.

His message is that, though we all differ in our appearance and individual circumstances, each of us who embraces the Gohonzon, chants Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, and works for kosen-rufu can - just as we are, in our present form - shine like the majestic treasure tower of life adorned with the seven kinds of treasures. The seven kinds of treasures, also called the seven treasures, are seven precious substances. The list differs among the Buddhist scriptures. In the Lotus Sutra, the seven are gold, silver, lapis lazuli, seashell, agate, pearl, and carnelian.

This is what makes Nichiren Buddhism a universal teaching transcending all differences, including nationality, ethnicity, and gender.

And not only that, the Daishonin teaches that we are all, just as we are, Many Treasures Buddha. Many Treasures is a Buddha of the past described in "The Emergence of the Treasure Tower" chapter of the Lotus Sutra as hailing from a land called Treasure Purity in the east, who pledges to appear with his treasure tower in order to attest to the validity of the Lotus Sutra.

Our efforts and behavior as we embrace the Mystic Law and engage in our Buddhist practice accord with those of Many Treasures Buddha. There are no requirements other than to "embrace the Lotus Sutra." We don't have to do anything special.

That's why there is no need to try to be anyone other than who we are, to put on airs, or to envy others. When we face problems and suffering, all we need to do is continue striving in our faith. When we persevere in faith and never give in to defeat, no matter what happens in life, we are showing proof that we have won and demonstrating the power of the Lotus Sutra.

From a lecture series "The Buddhism of the Sun - Illuminating the World," published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, October 2018.

Section 23.6: Treasuring Those Striving Hard behind the Scenes

President Ikeda has always treasured those who make dedicated efforts behind the scenes. In this excerpt, he discusses this important spirit, referencing the example of Nichiren Daishonin.

In 1272, Shijo Kingo went all the way to Sado Island to visit Nichiren Daishonin in exile. On that occasion, the Daishonin handed him a letter he had written for Kingo's wife, Nichigen-nyo, who had remained in Kamakura to take care of things in his absence.

While the Daishonin showed great care and concern for all his disciples, he was especially attentive to those striving hard behind the scenes. This was characteristic of his deeply compassionate spirit. In his letter to Nichigen-nyo, he writes:

And yet, in such a turbulent world, and when you do not even have servants you can rely on, you have sent your husband here. This shows that your sincerity is deeper even than the earth, and the earthly gods must certainly realize it. It is loftier even than the sky, and the heavenly gods Brahma and Shakra [the two main guardian deities of Buddhism] must also be aware of it (WND-1, 316).

Shijo Kingo proudly walked the path of his convictions, undaunted by the hardships that assailed him, and even visited the Daishonin on Sado Island. This was possible in no small part because of the support of his wife and family.

The Daishonin was fully aware of Nichigen-nyo's earnest behind-the-scenes efforts, which were unknown and unrecognized by others. He is telling her: "Though we can't meet in person, I am aware of everything you are going through. I know it is thanks to you that Kingo was able to make this journey."

Supported by the Daishonin's compassionate concern, knowing that he recognized their efforts and believed in them, Shijo Kingo, his wife, and their family forged ahead to overcome each difficulty they encountered. And each time they did, they further elevated their state of life and gained great good fortune.

Individuals and families who are unchanging and unwavering in their resolve whatever happens, staying true to and pursuing their chosen path to the very end, are unshakable champions with beautiful hearts.

Let's therefore make our Soka family one of unshakable champions in faith who strive their hardest and live out their lives on this noble path come what may!

From a speech at a Culture and Friendship Family Festival, Tokyo, September 15, 1991.

Section 23.8: Nichiren Buddhism Is a Teaching of Unparalleled Humanism

Citing a passage from a profoundly moving letter of encouragement that Nichiren Daishonin sent to a disciple, who had lost a beloved son at a young age, President Ikeda speaks of the humanism of Nichiren Buddhism, which teaches us to value each individual.

On September 5, 1280, Nanjo Tokimitsu's younger brother Nanjo Shichiro Goro died. The cause is unclear, but it was apparently a sudden death. He was only 16 according to the traditional Japanese way of counting, in which a person is counted as one year old on the day of their birth.

When the Daishonin learned the news, he immediately sent a letter conveying his heartfelt sympathy and encouragement to Tokimitsu and his mother, the lay nun Ueno. The letter is dated a day after the young man's death. He writes:

With regard to the news of the demise of Nanjo Shichiro Goro: Once a person is born that person must die - wise men and foolish, eminent and lowly alike all know this to be a fact. Therefore one should not be grieved and alarmed by a person's death; I know it to be so and teach others to do likewise. And yet when something like this actually happens, I wonder if it is not a dream or an illusion.

And how much greater must be the grief of the mother! She had lost her parents, her siblings, and even her beloved husband had preceded her in death, but still she had her many children to comfort her heart. Yet now her youngest child, her darling, a son, surpassing others in features and form, devoted in heart, in whom his associates took such delight - now all at once he has been taken away, like a budding flower that withers in the wind or a full moon that is suddenly lost from sight.

I can scarcely believe that such a thing has happened, and cannot even think of what words to write, though there is much more that I would say. . . .

Postscript: When I met him on the fifteenth day of the sixth month, I thought what a fine and spirited lad he was. How it grieves me to think I will never see him again! Nevertheless, he had devoted himself to Shakyamuni Buddha and the Lotus Sutra, and he died in a fitting manner. I know that in heart he has gone to join his departed father in the pure land of Eagle Peak, where they will clasp hands and face one another in joy. How splendid, how splendid (WND-2, 887)!

As the postscript notes, less than three months earlier, Shichiro Goro had visited Nichiren with his older brother Tokimitsu. The Daishonin had delighted in the sight of these two vigorous young men and cherished great hopes for their futures. Hearing that Shichiro Goro had died, he could not properly grasp what had happened, feeling it must be a dream or an illusion. His death left everyone shocked and saddened.

The lay nun Ueno was still pregnant with Shichiro Goro when her husband died. Her grief at losing her beloved son, who had been such a great comfort to her, must have been overwhelming. She was just like the mothers in our women's division, who have raised their children into fine successors for kosen-rufu.

The Daishonin sends words of profound empathy that reach deep into the bereaved mother's heart. He embraces her indescribable sadness as his own and weeps in his heart together with her.

This is not just superficial sympathy. It is a genuine sharing of suffering based on identifying deeply with the other person. It is sharing the innermost heart, the pain, and the sadness of the suffering individual. This was the behavior of Nichiren Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law. Surely no one can fail to be moved by his incomparable humanity. We of the Soka Gakkai are carrying on this profoundly humane spirit of the Daishonin.

Offering heartfelt encouragement is what defines a genuine practitioner of Buddhism. Losing no time in encouraging those who are struggling or suffering; helping people transform their sadness into courage, and suffering into hope - this is the spirit of the Daishonin.

From a speech at a nationwide youth division leaders meeting, Tokyo, April 12, 1992.

Section 23.9: President Makiguchi Treasured Each Individual

Recounting the efforts made by President Makiguchi, who treasured each individual and, despite his advanced age, readily traveled long distances to share the Mystic Law with even one person, President Ikeda underscores the original spirit of the Soka Gakkai.

Mr. Makiguchi declared: "What is the social raison d'être of religion apart from working for the happiness of humanity and making the world a better place?"

Religion has meaning only when it is dedicated to the welfare of individuals, the people, and society. To be satisfied merely with one's own well-being or salvation, while ignoring the suffering of others, is not the mark of a genuine faith.

Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching dedicated to realizing happiness and peace for all humanity.

As a result of Mr. Makiguchi's continued efforts to spread the Daishonin's teachings, the membership of the Soka Kyoiku Gakkai (Value-Creating Education Society; forerunner of the Soka Gakkai) began to increase steadily from around 1940. This came about because he adopted a revolutionary approach to spreading Nichiren Buddhism. He focused on visiting one home after another, speaking to one individual after another. That is the only way to do it, the way it must be done, he concluded.

Mr. Makiguchi, a great scholar, at first hoped that his writings would be an effective means of propagation, but they were not. Then, he tried speaking to large groups at lectures and meetings. That, too, proved ineffective. Books were no good, big meetings were no good. So he set out on his own to meet one individual after another. This led him to the conclusion that "the only way is to find a few like-minded friends."

After that, propagation advanced significantly. Capable individuals gradually began to emerge. Previously, he had spoken to thousands at large gatherings, but hardly anyone who joined continued practicing. With his new approach, however, the membership soon increased to the point that more than 500 people attended each general meeting.

Through conversations at discussion meetings and other small gatherings, individuals gained understanding and conviction in the validity of Nichiren Buddhism. They then exerted themselves in Buddhist practice and personally experienced the benefit of faith in their lives. This, in turn, brought in a fresh wave of new members.

Mr. Makiguchi always took an experimental approach, putting his ideas to the test. He tried things out for himself in order to find the best course. He was a truly extraordinary person. I can see why Mr. Toda was so devoted to him.

Mr. Makiguchi also readily went anywhere to meet with even a single individual. Once, he traveled all the way to Kagoshima in Kyushu, Japan's southwesternmost main island, to meet and speak with the parents of a young man who had joined the Soka Kyoiku Gakkai in Tokyo. It was an extremely long journey by third-class train car, and it must have been very hard on a man of his advanced age. But for the sake of Buddhism, he was prepared to spare no pains. Through his great sincerity, he was able to deepen the parents' understanding of Nichiren Buddhism.

It was actually during one such trip, to Suzaki in Shimoda in Shizuoka Prefecture, to speak with one individual, that he was arrested.

Many were inspired to join the Soka Kyoiku Gakkai and start practicing Nichiren Buddhism because of Mr. Makiguchi's vibrant, youthful voice, his absolute conviction, and his example of sincerity and compassion.

The roots that Mr. Makiguchi had planted throughout Japan were not eradicated by the militarist authorities' harsh wartime policy of thought control. They survived the war and lived on. Today, the Soka Gakkai has grown from those roots into a great towering tree, unshaken by anything. It has become a global organization. I'm sure Mr. Makiguchi would be delighted to see this.

From Haha no mai (Dance of Mothers), published in Japanese in January 2000.

Section 23.10: Working among and with the People

President Ikeda emphasizes that taking action to help those who are suffering is the very life of our Buddhist practice and the way to kosen-rufu.

An American missionary once visited Mahatma Gandhi and asked what his religion was. Pointing to two sick people resting in his room, Gandhi said: "To serve is my religion."

Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., the champion of the American Civil Rights Movement who inherited Gandhi's legacy of nonviolence, often said that any religion that overlooks the real-life sufferings of the people is a "spiritually moribund religion."

These convictions of Gandhi and King resonate deeply with us. No matter how lofty the ideals it espouses, a religion not committed to acting for the happiness of those who are suffering and struggling is spiritually lifeless.

Soka Gakkai members have always reached out to such people and fought for their happiness. As a result, our movement was at one time ridiculed and disparaged as "a religion of the poor and the sick."

But my mentor, Josei Toda, heartily laughed off such misguided attacks, regarding them as a badge of honor. Being able to help the suffering masses is, after all, the mark of a strong and effective religion, he declared. The criticism was proof that the Soka Gakkai is a living religion.

Mr. Toda declared with absolute conviction: "If practicing this Buddhism doesn't make you happy, I will give you my life!"

If we cannot help real, living people, no matter how deep their despair, then this Buddhism is a lie. Mr. Toda continued, with all his might, to touch people's lives and awaken in them a powerful and invincible courage to take on any adversity.

One individual after another was inspired by Mr. Toda's wholehearted encouragement to stand up and fight for happiness. While overcoming their own karma, they also stepped forward and fought to achieve the greater purpose of building a new society. In other words, they stood up for kosen-rufu.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, September 13, 2002.

Section 23.11: President Toda's Commitment to Personal Guidance

President Ikeda vividly describes how President Toda offered personal guidance to individuals suffering from myriad problems, to help them revitalize their lives. This spirit, he says, forms the essence of the Soka Gakkai's commitment to supporting and encouraging others.

At the end of May 1951, soon after Mr. Toda became the second Soka Gakkai president, he moved his company - in which he held the position of advisor - to new premises near Ichigaya Station in Tokyo. I was only 23, and working hard as head of the sales department. Our new office consisted of a single room in the three-story Ichigaya Building, near the outer moat that formerly encircled Edo Castle.

The building also housed the editorial office of the Seikyo Shimbun, the organization's newspaper, which had just printed its first issue on April 20, 1951. And a branch office of the Soka Gakkai Headquarters, then in Nishi-Kanda, was set up in the same building. Both of these Soka Gakkai-related offices were on the building's second floor, along with that of Mr. Toda's company.

The Soka Gakkai's branch office was only about 15 square meters, or 160 square feet. President Toda's desk stood near the room's windowed back wall, with seven or eight chairs set before it. Every afternoon from 2:00 to 4:00, he offered personal guidance and encouragement to members who came to see him there.

The young woman who worked at the building's reception desk recently recounted her memories of those days. She remembers being surprised at the number of people coming to see Mr. Toda. Many of those who asked for the Soka Gakkai office at her reception desk seemed, even to her casual glance, burdened with troubles and cares. What astonished her even more, she recalled, was that when those same people left, they seemed completely transformed, smiling happily and brimming with vigor.

The branch office was more sparse and plain than the waiting room of a small clinic, but it was certainly a harbor of hope, an oasis of revitalization, for the people who visited it.

Euripides, the ancient Greek poet and playwright, said that human beings have no other remedy for their grief than the comfort of a good person and friend.

My mentor spoke frankly and openly to the members who came to see him. When he asked "What's wrong?" in his warm voice, his eyes sparkling with compassion behind his glasses, the members relaxed completely and candidly shared their struggles.

They had all kinds of problems: financial, work-related, health, family and children, human relations, goals and life choices, questions of karma or destiny, and sometimes even life-or-death situations. Each person seemed to be asking: "Can someone like me ever become happy?"

President Toda listened to their serious concerns and, empathizing with the members as if their sufferings were his own, he encouraged them in such a way as to stir their hearts and inspire them to rouse the great power of faith and practice. "Don't worry," he assured them. "If you practice this Buddhism, you cannot fail to become happy. Please be a champion of the spirit. Live out your life fully and proudly as a praiseworthy member of the Soka Gakkai."

Each guidance session he conducted was an all-out effort to help the person in front of him. His words themselves seemed to reverberate with the spirit of the Daishonin's infinitely compassionate declaration "The varied sufferings that all living beings undergo - all these are Nichiren's own sufferings" (OTT, 138).

Among those who visited President Toda at the branch office were leaders embarrassed to have personal problems even though they held positions of responsibility in the organization. He warmly comforted them, saying that encountering problems and challenges is natural for those who are trying to do their best in life. In contrast, he sternly reprimanded those who were so conceited that they looked down on members who were struggling.

Personal suffering helps us understand the suffering of others. Our problems only make us stronger.

Mr. Toda had lost a child, had experienced repeated crises with his businesses, and had been imprisoned for two years for his faith in the Lotus Sutra. He later reflected that these experiences of sorrow, grief, and hardship, and of surmounting countless daunting challenges, made him ideally qualified to be the Soka Gakkai's president.

The renowned French writer Victor Hugo declared: "Great sufferings swell the soul to gigantic proportions."

Toward that end, it is important to offer wholehearted encouragement to people facing such sufferings, to infuse their lives with courage and hope, so they are not defeated.

Guidance in faith must be based on the writings of Nichiren Daishonin. The ability to give inspiring guidance cannot be developed by relying just on personal judgments and opinions. It has to be honed through striving in the two ways of practice and study within the organization for kosen-rufu.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, May 24, 2003.

Section 23.12: The Tradition of the Soka Gakkai

Focusing on the individual, creating a ripple effect through dialogue and encouragement that spreads from one person to another, is the formula for the eternal expansion of kosen-rufu.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "The popular proverb says that 'one is the mother of ten thousand'" (WND-1, 131).

One person may seem small and unimportant, but one person is the "mother," or source, that can empower countless multitudes.

The Daishonin also says: "One drop of the great ocean contains within it the waters of all the various rivers that flow into the ocean" (WND-1, 146).

A single individual who encounters and awakens to the true, great Law goes on to courageously engage in altruistic action, meeting with another and telling them about Buddhism. Never forget that this ripple effect from one person to another is the source of the limitless expansion of kosen-rufu, and that through such steady efforts, the history of kosen-rufu will continue to unfold without end.

Valuing each individual - this is an unbroken tradition of the Soka Gakkai. We focus on one suffering person, wholeheartedly engage them in dialogue and do everything we can to encourage them. You, our young people, especially, must not lose sight of this tradition.

Leaders who only make fine speeches before large gatherings but fail to apply themselves in more down-to-earth efforts, such as giving individual guidance and encouragement, are not real leaders, nor can they ever be real leaders as long as they follow that pattern. If that kind of leader comes to predominate in our organization, the Soka Gakkai spirit will perish.

We must ensure that authoritarianism and scheming do not become the trend in our organization. I want you to bear deeply in mind that without wholehearted guidance and efforts to support people on the individual level, there can be no genuine Buddhist practice.

The formula for the eternal expansion of kosen-rufu is found in ceaseless, steady efforts to benefit others and engage in dialogue, efforts that spread from one person to another.

From a speech at a Tokyo Number 2 Area chapter leaders meeting, Tokyo, October 11, 1987.

Section 23.13: Important Points for Offering Personal Guidance

President Ikeda has always stressed the importance of personal guidance to enable each Soka Gakkai member to advance on the great path of happiness and to build a solid organization for the development of kosen-rufu. In this excerpt from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) discusses points to bear in mind when giving personal guidance.

Saying that he wished to speak in a relaxed, informal manner, Shin'ichi proceeded to discuss the basic attitude leaders need to have when offering personal guidance.

"First, you must never become emotional. Some members may have a weak commitment to faith and make negative remarks about the Soka Gakkai, but you mustn't allow yourself to get emotional or raise your voice. If you do, you'll cause the other person to close their heart to you. Then, any guidance or encouragement you offer won't have any effect.

"Second, strong conviction in faith is crucial. The key to encouraging others is being able to move and inspire them through your own conviction. That way, logical explanations will have an impact. That's why it's important to chant a lot and bring forth powerful life force before going to offer guidance. To communicate your conviction, it's also important to relate your own or other members' experiences in faith.

"Third, you must never share with anyone else what somebody has told you in a personal guidance session. Leaders in the realm of faith, in particular, have a responsibility to protect others' privacy. If the things you were told in confidence were to get out, it would lead people to mistrust the Soka Gakkai as a whole. It is also a very serious offense in terms of Buddhism, because it obstructs the progress of kosen-rufu.

"Fourth, always carry out personal guidance with patience and a warm, embracing spirit. Say, for example, you visit and encourage one of your members who has stopped coming to meetings. It is unlikely that they will be inspired to make a fresh determination in faith after only one visit. You need to call on them from time to time and patiently continue to encourage them. Eventually, your sincerity will reach them and they will come to trust you and want to become active again. Perseverance is vital in offering personal guidance.

"When you've been able to help someone to stand up in faith, it's important to follow up with them, perhaps with a phone call or letter, to find out how they're doing, to see if they've overcome their problem, and to continue encouraging them. When you become a leader, you set out enthusiastically to home visit members and encourage them. If you leave it at that, with just a single visit, however, you haven't finished the job.

"Fifth, never forget that the ultimate goal of giving guidance to somebody is to relieve their suffering and bring them joy. People grapple with various kinds of problems and seek guidance only after they've been struggling for a while. It's important that you encourage them in such a way as to alleviate their suffering and pain.

"Let's say, for example, there is a women's division member who is frustrated because her husband isn't interested in practicing. You could start by reassuring her: 'Don't worry. Life is long. There's no need to rush matters. Your husband was born with a noble mission. Your prayers for your husband are certain to be answered.' That will put her mind at ease. Then you can talk about specific things she can do."

A caring spirit and deep concern for others is indispensable in offering personal guidance. That spirit will manifest as warm consideration and words of heartfelt concern and encouragement.

When he was a youth division leader, Shin'ichi often invited young men's division members to his apartment to encourage them. Sometimes he would serve them a meal or listen to recordings of Beethoven or other composers with them.

Wherever Shin'ichi went - whether it was Tokyo, Sapporo, Osaka, Yamaguchi, or Yubari - he always made a point of encouraging members individually. One young man he met was working hard to help pay off his father's debts while also supporting his parents and his younger siblings. And there was a men's division member who was out of work. He and his wife were both suffering from illness, and they had an infant. Individuals such as these were all facing very harsh circumstances and doing their best to survive.

Personal guidance is a noble endeavor to impart the light of hope to those who are suffering and enable them to shine as Buddhas.

Shin'ichi continued to share his thoughts.

"Observing many leaders, I have come to the conclusion that those who have dedicated themselves to offering personal guidance to members never give up their practice. I think this is because giving guidance - though hard, unglamorous, and inconspicuous work that requires a great deal of patience - truly deepens one's faith. And as these leaders continue to offer guidance, they reflect seriously on their own lives and are able to guide themselves as well. That is why they don't abandon their faith.

"Of course, sharing Nichiren Buddhism with others is important. But if we don't continue to thoroughly guide and encourage people once they have started practicing, then our success in introducing them will be only a momentary victory. Also, because enabling someone to receive the Gohonzon is a conspicuous achievement, people who do so are praised and celebrated by their fellow members. Some grow arrogant because of this and let their faith slide as a result.

"Along with introducing Buddhism to others, making wholehearted efforts to guide and encourage our fellow members one to one is essential in strengthening our own faith and elevating our state of life.

"Both introducing others and offering personal guidance constitute the work of cultivating the spirit through dialogue. Cultivation in general requires courage and perseverance to take on difficulty. But that challenging work develops and opens up the potential in people's lives and enables them to enjoy the fruit of happiness. I hope you will all continue to sincerely engage in dialogue and the effort to cultivate members' lives. Personal guidance brings warm humanity to our organization and is the way to strengthen it.

"In the Soka Gakkai, personal guidance is carried out naturally, every day. Our organization is a network of encouragement aimed at helping each member overcome suffering. It also seeks to rebuild the connections between human beings that have been severed in contemporary society. I believe that our efforts to guide and encourage others are important intangible assets not only for the Soka Gakkai but society in general. I'm certain the day will come when society and the world will recognize this."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 27, "Fierce Struggle" chapter.

Section 23.14: The Key to the Soka Gakkai's Development

Referring to his dialogue with the futurist Hazel Henderson, President Ikeda discusses the essential spirit that has enabled the Soka Gakkai to develop on a global scale.

I am now engaged in a dialogue with the renowned futurist Hazel Henderson, which we hope to publish. The dialogue was published in English as Planetary Citizenship: Your Values, Beliefs, and Actions Can Shape a Sustainable World, in 2004, by Middleway Press.

Ms. Henderson has a deep understanding of the Soka Gakkai and the Soka Gakkai International, and is sincerely open to learning from our movement.

I told Ms. Henderson that because the Soka Gakkai had reached out to those who were suffering, it had been ridiculed in the past as a "gathering of the poor and the sick," but that we regarded that as the highest honor.

"That attitude is really the starting point of the SGI, then," said Ms. Henderson. "Very impressive." She continued: "Whoever they are and in whatever walk of life they find themselves, all people are, in a way, sacred to me. They're all sacred because they all have that spark of life."

This is absolutely true. All people are equally noble.

Buddhism, in particular, a teaching of great impartial wisdom, doesn't judge people based on their family background, wealth, education, or position. It focuses solely on each person's actions, and looks at the spirit behind those actions. As the Daishonin says, "It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 949; 1000).

Consequently, genuine practitioners of Buddhism are not afraid of arrogant people who make a show of power and authority. They regard them with a calm and composed attitude, stand up to them, and correct them when necessary. They value and protect decent ordinary people above all.

Ms. Henderson asked: "How has the SGI grown into this influential worldwide organization? I will be your student on this one."

Truly first-rate people are humble.

I answered in part: "We made the human revolution of each individual our basic point. One must transcend the smaller self and devote his or her life to large goals, for other people and for society."

And I went on to explain:

The SGI has grown into an indomitable worldwide organization because it prizes every individual.

Having devoted my life to this philosophy, I constantly urge our leaders to embrace it. We have no secret stratagem. Our members encourage one another and accept the challenges posed by their individual reformation of character. Each person's triumph over his or her "lesser self" propels social development and ultimately influences human history. This is the core of our human revolution movement.

Valuing each individual - this is the spirit of the Soka Gakkai. As long as we keep that tradition vibrantly alive, the Soka Gakkai will grow and develop forever.

From a speech at a Nagano Prefecture representatives conference, Nagano, August 24, 2001.
