Chapter 29: A Religion That Exists for People's Happiness

Section 29.1: The Soka Gakkai Is a Humanistic Movement

President Ikeda has opened uncharted paths for worldwide kosen-rufu based on his unshakable conviction that religion should exist for the sake of people's happiness, and that we should go wherever people are and share Nichiren Buddhism with them. He has engaged in an unrelenting struggle against the oppressive religious authoritarianism of the Nichiren Shoshu priesthood.

Overcoming untold obstacles in his endeavor, President Ikeda has carried out a religious revolution on a global scale. This chapter features some of his remarks and guidance on the importance of religion truly serving the needs of human beings.

In the first excerpt, President Ikeda discusses how the deification of Shakyamuni after his death and a dwindling focus on real-life practice gradually led to Buddhism's decline in India. He affirms that the Soka Gakkai has inherited the true spirit of Nichiren Daishonin, who fought to humanize Buddhism.

Why did the great teaching of Buddhism decline in India?

An interesting perspective on this is offered by Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru of India, who pondered this question extensively. At a meeting with the French art historian Andre Malraux, he shared his conclusions.

Incidentally, I was fortunate to meet twice with Mr. Malraux, who had demonstrated a strong interest in Buddhism.

Nehru's thoughts were as follows: "The genius of the Buddha has to do with the fact that he is a human being. The originator of one of the most profound systems of thought in the history of humanity, an inflexible spirit and the most noble compassion. An accuser, vis-a-vis the teeming multitude of the gods. When he became deified, he merged with that multitude, which closed round him." This quote comes from Andre Malraux's Anti-Memoirs, translated by Terence Kilmartin, published by Hamish Hamilton in 1968.

Shakyamuni Buddha lived his life as a human being, and he repudiated the gods that were widely worshiped at that time.

Nichiren Daishonin, likewise, remonstrated with Hachiman, considered a guardian deity of Japan. He did not beseech the heavenly deities, the protective forces of the universe, for assistance; rather, as a human being who embraced the Mystic Law, he summoned them to action.

In essence, Buddhism teaches how human beings should live. Through his own example, Shakyamuni taught us how to live our lives. This is the path of mentor and disciple.

But at some point, the human being Shakyamuni was elevated and transfigured into a deity. While many in present-day India still revere the Buddha, it is generally as one of the gods of the vast Hindu pantheon. Though they regard the Buddha as an object of reverence, he is no longer seen as a model on which to base one's life. The path of mentor and disciple has been lost.

When Buddhism was no longer a way of life, Nehru concluded, it died in India.

Today, Buddhism as a way of life is completely absent in the Nichiren Shoshu priesthood. The priests see Nichiren Buddhism not as a way for people to live, but as a way to embellish their own authority and status. They have made it a means to justify their own corruption and degeneration. This truly epitomizes the priesthood's decline.

From a certain perspective, Nichiren Daishonin's struggle can be seen as a struggle to humanize Buddhism. He sought to return Buddhism, which had grown divorced from people's actual lives, to the people, teaching it as a practical way to live. His message is that the Buddha is an ordinary human being, and we ordinary human beings are Buddhas.

The most popular schools of Buddhism during the Daishonin's time taught of Buddhas, such as Amida Buddha and Mahavairochana Buddha, who were distant, supernatural beings. The Buddha in the Lotus Sutra was also widely regarded as completely separate and removed from human beings. The Daishonin sought to reverse this viewpoint.

The Daishonin teaches that people who have faith in and practice the Mystic Law are Buddhas. Faith in the Mystic Law is the key to unlocking the world of Buddhahood.

What kind of person, then, is a Buddha? What is a Buddha's way of life? Nichiren Daishonin indicates that a Buddha is one who battles and vanquishes the three obstacles and four devils while taking on the challenges of the real world. It is a life dedicated to kosen-rufu for the sake of the Mystic Law and the happiness of all people.

Note on terminology: The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are the obstacle of earthly desires, the obstacle of karma, and the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are the hindrance of the five components, the hindrance of earthly desires, the hindrance of death, and the hindrance of the devil king.

The Daishonin exemplified this himself. The SGI and each one of you are following that same path. You are all shining Buddhas.

In exact accord with the Daishonin's spirit, the Soka Gakkai has enabled us to put Buddhism into practice in daily life, as a guiding philosophy for living. Just as the Daishonin returned to the basics of Buddhism, the Soka Gakkai returned to the basics of faith and practice in Nichiren Buddhism. Both returned to the starting point, that is, human beings.

Mr. Toda once called our faith "a human religion." Nichiren Buddhism is humanism in the most genuine sense.

From a speech at an SGI-Germany executive conference, Germany, May 24, 1994.

Section 29.2: The Soka Gakkai's Spiritual Independence, A Fresh Start toward Worldwide Kosen-rufu

From the mid-1970s, the Nichiren Shoshu priesthood, jealous of the success of the Soka Gakkai and President Ikeda in building a global network for kosen-rufu, plotted the lay organization's destruction. It tried to drive a wedge between President Ikeda and the members and bring the Soka Gakkai directly under its control. In an attempt to resolve this situation, President Ikeda resigned as Soka Gakkai president in 1979. The developments leading up to and immediately after this event are known as the "first priesthood issue."

The fundamental nature of the priesthood, however, remained unchanged, and in 1990, it hatched a plan known as Operation C, with "C" meaning to "cut," finally excommunicating the organization in November 1991. The developments leading up to and immediately after this announcement are known as the "second priesthood issue."

On November 30, two days after the notice of excommunication was issued, a special Soka Gakkai leaders meeting to celebrate the organization's spiritual independence was held with President Ikeda.

Hearing that a special celebration was happening today, I decided to attend!

November 28, the date of the 1991 Notice of Excommunication from Nichiren Shoshu, is now a historic date.

November is the month of the Soka Gakkai's founding and, as you all know, the number 28 is significant as the number of chapters in the Lotus Sutra. Quite unexpectedly, yet very appropriately, this date, November 28, has become the day of our spiritual independence.

In a letter dated November 28 in 1269, Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Since in any case my body will in the end be tossed aimlessly into the fields, I wish to give my life for the one Buddha vehicle of the Lotus Sutra, to follow in the footsteps of the boy Snow Mountains and the bodhisattva Medicine King, and, just as King Sen'yo and King Possessor of Virtue had their names remembered in later ages, to be spoken of and included in the Lotus and Nirvana sutras of the future" (WND-2, 336).

Note on terminology: Bodhisattva Medicine King is described in the Lotus Sutra preached by Shakyamuni, and the other figures appear in the Nirvana Sutra. The Daishonin states that he wishes that, in like manner, his name will be included in the Lotus and Nirvana sutras preached by a Buddha of the future.

I am convinced, just as President Toda said, that the name Soka Gakkai Buddha is certain to be included in the Buddhist scriptures of future ages.

Through the selfless dedication of its members acting in exact accord with the Daishonin's teachings, the Soka Gakkai has actualized the widespread propagation of the Mystic Law. No other organization has propagated the Mystic Law to this extent, sharing its greatness with people all around the world.

I would like to declare once again that the Soka Gakkai is the organization carrying out correct faith and practice in the true spirit of Nichiren Buddhism.

The Buddhism of Nichiren Daishonin is the Buddhism of the Sun; it is a world religion illuminating all humanity. Viewed from every aspect, the Soka Gakkai's development, as an organization whose members uphold this great philosophy, should also be global and universal. It mustn't be held back within a narrow, closed, feudalistic framework.

Based on perspectives articulated by scholars, the characteristics of a world religion can perhaps be summarized as follows: Administration conducted in an open, democratic fashion; Adherence to the fundamentals of faith while allowing free speech; Egalitarianism that promotes mutual respect and the participation of all believers; Emphasis on faith rather than ritual; Leadership that is open to all members, based on ability rather than birthright; and Universal doctrines that are propagated using methods appropriate to the times.

The Soka Gakkai has every one of these characteristics.

Buddhism teaches that all things are in a state of constant flux. It also tells us that as long as we have faith in the correct teaching, we can regard everything that happens as according fundamentally with the Buddha's intent. It's important to look at the present changes from a longer perspective, 20 or 30 years hence.

It's truly regrettable that the Soka Gakkai's efforts to maintain the harmonious unity of the priesthood and the laity have now failed to bear fruit. But, as many thoughtful individuals have pointed out, the priesthood, if it continues on its present course, is certain to decline with the passage of time and inevitably find itself embroiled in unending infighting. Some in the priesthood have also voiced concern about this. If it happens, it will have disastrous consequences.

Such conflict within the priesthood could quite easily have spilled over into the Soka Gakkai and led to our precious members being further exploited and experiencing even more suffering and pain, something that must be avoided at all costs.

I think it is deeply significant, therefore, that the priesthood should have notified us that it was disassociating itself from the Soka Gakkai before that point was reached. Later, we are sure to see that we have had a lucky escape.

We of the Soka Gakkai have faith and unity. Please be confident that all is unfolding just as Nichiren Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, would have wanted, and move forward with complete peace of mind. The Daishonin is protecting us.

Mr. Toda once said: "The Soka Gakkai must remain directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin through his writings." Mr. Toda always saw right to the heart of things. He was a great visionary.

We believe in Nichiren Daishonin, not in some intermediary, as our foundation. We must be clear on this point. We will continue to work tirelessly to fulfill the great vow for "kosen-rufu through the compassionate propagation of the great Law" in exact accord with the intent of the Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day. This phrase appears as one of the inscriptions in the margin of the Soka Gakkai Joju Gohonzon, enshrined in the Hall of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu.

In "On Repaying Debts of Gratitude," the Daishonin writes: "If Nichiren's compassion is truly great and encompassing, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo will spread for ten thousand years and more, for all eternity" (WND-1, 736).

We must remember that kosen-rufu advances due to the boundless compassion of the Daishonin. It is our supreme honor to shoulder that noble undertaking.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin says: "Now when Nichiren chants Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, he is enabling all living beings to attain Buddhahood in the ten thousand years of the Latter Day of the Law" (OTT, 41).

Anyone who strives in accord with the Daishonin's teachings can attain Buddhahood.

The Daishonin says "in the ten thousand years of the Latter Day of the Law" and "for ten thousand years and more." Let us set forth on a magnificent, hope-filled new start in our efforts for kosen-rufu, aiming toward the future, ten thousand years hence.

From a speech at the Soka Renaissance Victory Leaders Meeting, Tokyo, November 30, 1991.

Section 29.3: The Dawn of a Religious Revolution

In 1998, seven years after the Soka Gakkai achieved its spiritual independence from Nichiren Shoshu, President Ikeda proudly declared the complete victory of the Soka Renaissance, the Soka Gakkai's fresh start toward worldwide kosen-rufu free from the authoritarian dogmatism of a corrupt priesthood.

The Ninth Symphony is the thunderous cry from the heart of the great German composer Ludwig van Beethoven, calling on us to break through suffering and attain a state of joy. It is a lofty and enduring composition, a rousing song of people's triumph that brings humanity together.

On October 3, 1990, the Ninth Symphony was performed as a victory song celebrating the reunification of East and West Germany, finally achieved after long years of suffering.

In mid-December of the year the two Germanys were reunified, a document from the Nichiren Shoshu Administrative Office titled "Inquiry" arrived at the Soka Gakkai Headquarters. It asserted that to sing the "Ode to Joy" from Beethoven's Ninth Symphony in German was to perform a Christian hymn, and that this constituted "praise for a non-Buddhist teaching." The priesthood strongly objected to the proposal I had made at the Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting the previous month, on November 16, 1990, that members organize a large-scale choral performance of "Ode to Joy."

The "Inquiry" made false claims about what I had said and sought to portray me as slandering the Law and the high priest.

The Soka Gakkai requested an opportunity for dialogue on the matter, but the leaders of the priesthood refused. Shrinking away from any discussion, they remained hidden from view.

Then, at the end of the year, on the pretext of revising the Nichiren Shoshu Rules and Regulations, they dismissed me from my post as chief representative of all Nichiren Shoshu lay organizations.

Their true motive was crystal clear. They wished to oust me, destroy the Soka Gakkai, and subjugate our members to the authority of the priesthood. They were intent on creating a fixed hierarchy in which the priesthood, with the high priest at the top, completely dominated and controlled the lay followers.

This was nothing short of the destruction of the true teachings and principles of Nichiren Daishonin, who affirmed the dignity and equality of all people, referring to people as treasure towers and children of the Buddha, namely, as individuals who inherently possess the potential for Buddhahood.

In addition, in its irrational labeling of and discrimination against art and culture, which are expressions of the human spirit, the priesthood was in essence no different from inhumane tyrants and repressive clerics of times past.

If these actions were left unchallenged, Nichiren Buddhism would be reduced to a strange occult religion whose aim was to oppress people.

On top of this, many other serious problems concerning the priesthood came to light one after another. There were actions that blatantly transgressed the Daishonin's teachings, including Nichiren Shoshu's high priest Nikken Abe erecting a new ancestral tombstone in a Zen temple cemetery. There were money-hungry priests who demanded high fees for their funeral services and preparation of toba offerings for the deceased. And there were unending accounts of priests' licentious and corrupt behavior.

For the sake of kosen-rufu, we could not allow the integrity of Nichiren Buddhism, a humanistic teaching that exists for the happiness of all people, to be trampled underfoot in this manner. We had to protect the Daishonin's lofty spirit at all costs. Our resolute stand to do just that marked the dawn of a religious revolution.

A year later, on November 28, 1991, Nichiren Shoshu excommunicated the Soka Gakkai, which had consistently striven in exact accord with the correct teaching of Nichiren Buddhism.

When this happened, our members were not shaken in the slightest. They clearly saw that Nikken's preposterous behavior expressed what the Daishonin described in his writings as the workings of the devil king of the sixth heaven exerting his influence to destroy Buddhism.

Note on terminology: The devil king of the sixth heaven, also called the devil king or heavenly devil, is the king of devils, who dwells in the highest or the sixth heaven of the world of desire. He is also named Freely Enjoying Things Conjured by Others, the king who makes free use of the fruits of others' efforts for his own pleasure. Served by innumerable minions, he obstructs Buddhist practice and delights in sapping the life force of other beings, the manifestation of the fundamental ignorance inherent in life. The devil king is a personification of the negative tendency to force others to one's will at any cost.

The Soka Gakkai has actively advanced kosen-rufu, fulfilling its mission as an organization that has inherited the Buddha's intent. In excommunicating the Soka Gakkai, the priesthood, through its own actions, has cut itself off from the heritage of faith. It has returned to its corrupt ways during World War II, when it disrespected and betrayed the Daishonin and became steeped in slander of the Law.

The excommunication also signaled the spiritual independence of the Soka Gakkai, liberating us from the stifling fetters of a jealous, mean-spirited priesthood that sought to keep lay believers firmly under its thumb.

Seven years have passed since then.

The outcome of the struggle between good and evil in Buddhism and the workings of the law of cause and effect have been clear and uncompromising.

The decline of the priesthood, which under Nikken became disordered and destructive, is indisputable. None are more unfortunate than its followers, who remain deceived and are still unaware of the priesthood's errors.

In contrast, look at our joyous, ever-growing global network of members working for kosen-rufu! Listen to their hope-filled voices raised in song, emanating from lives overflowing with vitality and benefit!

The new humanism of Soka emerging from Nichiren Buddhism is connecting people across national and ethnic boundaries. It is being praised by people everywhere as a beacon of hope for a new age.

The many leaders from around the world who, seeking a philosophy of humanism and peace, visit Soka Gakkai facilities today offer testimony to the integrity of our movement, just as Many Treasures Buddha attested to the truth of Shakyamuni's teachings in the Lotus Sutra.

A genuine commitment to humanism means to fight staunchly against evil and cut it off at the root.

The voices of members singing "Ode to Joy" resound far and wide as the Soka Gakkai's tricolor flag of victory flutters in the sky of a new age.

A powerful forward momentum for kosen-rufu, for the new year and a new age of Soka, has begun.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, December 23, 1998.

Section 29.5: At the Forefront of Religious Reform

Referring to ideas expressed by the British historian Arnold J. Toynbee, President Ikeda discusses the key to much-needed reform on the part of today's higher religions, and asserts that the Soka Gakkai is at the forefront of such reform.

Note on terminology: In A Study of History, Toynbee wrote: "By higher religions I mean religions designed to bring human beings into direct communion with absolute spiritual Reality as individuals, in contrast to earlier forms of religion that have brought them only into indirect communion with It through the medium of the particular society in which they have happened to be participants."

What is the biggest issue facing the higher religions today? The eminent historian Arnold J. Toynbee has said that they are in need of a major reform.

Professor Toynbee's attention was drawn to the Soka Gakkai because he regarded it as a vibrant higher religion for the present and future. At his invitation, I went to London in May 1972, and again in May 1973, to engage in an extended dialogue with him.

What is needed to make the higher religions shine in the 21st century?

In his work An Historian's Approach to Religion, Professor Toynbee stressed the need to distinguish the "essence" of religions from the "non-essential accretions," the extraneous trappings that have accrued over time.

We need to focus on the essence of a religion, the unchanging qualities that transcend the limitations of certain times and social settings, and discard the rest. Should we fail in that endeavor, religion has no future, and humankind will not be able to elevate itself spiritually.

For us in the Soka Gakkai, what is "essential" in terms of our religious practice and belief? It is to believe in Nichiren Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, and uphold faith in the Three Great Secret Laws.

Note on terminology: The Three Great Secret Laws are core principles of Nichiren Daishonin's teachings. They are the object of devotion of the essential teaching, which is the Gohonzon; the daimoku of the essential teaching, which is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo; and the sanctuary of the essential teaching, where the Gohonzon is enshrined. They are called secret because they are implicit in the text of the "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra.

In other words, it is the fundamental teaching that the Buddha expounded to lead all people to enlightenment.

The "non-essential accretions" are the elements that change with time and place, in particular, ceremonies and methodologies that took shape in the centuries after the Daishonin's death.

Professor Toynbee likened such accretions to the chaff, and the true essence of a religion to the grain. Separating the chaff from the grain is the natural thing to do. He argued that the chaff should be discarded, and the grain extracted and prized.

In other words, the key is sloughing off added layers to get at the essence of religion.

Slough off the temporary elements and the extraneous trappings that have accumulated over the centuries. Discard features that have meaning only in a specific, restricted cultural context. Save the true spirit or heart of the religion. That is the only way to ensure the flourishing of humanity in the 21st century. This is what Professor Toynbee meant by religious reform.

In his work, he said of the 16th-century Christian Reformation: "'The Reformation' is not just a particular past event in the Early Modern chapter of the history of the Western branch of Christianity. It is a perpetual challenge which is being presented at every moment to all higher religions alike, and which none of them can ignore for one moment without betraying its trust."

The Soka Gakkai is at the forefront of just the sort of religious reform that Professor Toynbee called for, which no doubt would delight both the Daishonin and his successor, Nikko Shonin. Our development offers a bright source of hope for humanity in the 21st century.

From a speech at a May 3 commemorative gathering, Tokyo, May 3, 1994.

Section 29.6: Responding Wisely to the Times

As practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism, President Ikeda says, it's important that we use our wisdom to freely create value in response to the diversity of society and the changing times.

In one of his letters, Nichiren Daishonin praises his young disciple Nanjo Tokimitsu for admirably inheriting the spirit of faith of his deceased father, saying: "Blue dye is bluer even than indigo itself, and ice is colder than water. How wonderful it is, how wonderful!" (WND-2, 809).

Note on terminology: The simile "blue dye is bluer even than indigo itself" derives from a writing of the Chinese philosopher Hsun Tzu. The liquid extracted from the indigo plant is not a deep blue color, which is only obtained by repeatedly dipping the cloth into the dye until it attains a blue more intense than the color of the juice from the plant itself. The simile expresses the meaning of deepening one's learning and knowledge through study. It is cited in T'ien-t'ai's Great Concentration and Insight. Nichiren Daishonin often employs this simile of the indigo plant not only in the context of deepening one's Buddhist practice, but also growing as successors.

All of you, wherever you reside, are following in the footsteps of dedicated pioneer members and freely and spontaneously carrying out activities for kosen-rufu. This is most reassuring.

I feel the Daishonin also teaches us in this passage how important it is in Buddhism that we grow to surpass our predecessors and strive to develop and advance our movement even more than they have.

Children following their parents' lead and younger members repeating the words of older members may, from one perspective, seem like a fine example of inheriting tradition. And it is, of course, true that the fundamental spirit of Nichiren Buddhism and of faith in the Mystic Law is eternal and unchanging. The times, however, are constantly changing. Society is in a state of rapid transformation. The world is endlessly diverse, and real people are endlessly complex and fragile. Reaching another's heart is no easy feat.

In response to such human diversity and the rapidly changing times, we need to be able to bring forth abundant wisdom to lead others to enlightenment and realize kosen-rufu. Such wisdom is also an expression of compassion.

You may talk about the most profound theories, but doing so will have little meaning if no one understands them. And insisting on using old language and expressions and old ways of doing things often will give people the wrong impression about Nichiren Buddhism and its true greatness. That not only constitutes a lack of compassion for others, but, quite frankly, violates the spirit of the Daishonin, who sought to lead all people to enlightenment.

Buddhist terminology developed over long centuries of Buddhist history. But you can't expect people in cultures without that tradition to understand its true meaning. In cases like this, we need to come up with expressions that more accurately and understandably convey the intent and meaning.

This is one of the great challenges of worldwide kosen-rufu. I am confident that this path accords with the spirit of the Daishonin, who taught the principle of progress expressed as "bluer than indigo itself."

Buddhism teaches the precept of adapting to local customs and the manners of the times as long as they do not violate the fundamental teachings of Buddhism. In addition, among the four ways of preaching, we find "to teach Buddhism in secular terms" and "to teach according to people's respective capacities."

Note on terminology: The four ways of preaching, also called four ways of teaching, are four ways in which the Buddha expounds his teaching, explained in the Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom. They are: first, to teach Buddhism in secular terms, explaining to people that it will fulfill their desires, thus arousing their willingness to take faith; second, to teach according to people's respective capacities, thus enabling them to increase their store of good karma; third, to help people abandon their illusions and free themselves from the three poisons of greed, anger, and foolishness, by teaching those caught up in greed to recognize the impurity of their attachments, those dominated by anger to practice compassionate acts, and those blinded by stupidity to perceive the causal law; and fourth, to reveal the ultimate truth directly, causing the people to awaken to it. Compared to this last way of teaching, the first three are regarded as temporary means.

Because Nichiren Buddhism teaches life's fundamental truth, we can create value without limit. And because it is grounded in reason, it offers a practice that anyone can understand and accept. That is the essence of the correct teaching.

From a speech at an SGI world youth training course, Tokyo, October 14, 1990.

Section 29.7: Embracing Others in Friendship with a Big, Magnanimous Heart

In volume 1 of The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto, whose character represents President Ikeda, makes his first overseas trip for worldwide kosen-rufu in 1960, traveling to three countries, including the United States. In the excerpts featured below, he answers questions from members at discussion meetings in Hawaii and Washington, D.C., and talks in an easily accessible manner about the meaning of a truly humanistic religion.

In response to the question: "My son is going to a Christian school, but I'm wondering if this isn't slandering Buddhism?"

"It's perfectly fine. Your son isn't going to school to practice Christianity; he's going there to learn and study. Since that's the case, there is absolutely no problem.

"You may pay money to the school, but that's simply for tuition; it is not an offering to Christianity. It is natural to pay a fee if your son is being taught there.

"The basis of our faith is to believe in and pray to the Gohonzon, which was revealed by Nichiren Daishonin. As long as we do not veer from this foundation, there is no need to be rigid or intolerant.

"Many aspects of our culture and how we live are connected in one way or another to religion. For instance, most companies are closed on Sundays. This practice comes from Christianity, which views Sunday as a day of rest and worship. Yet, anyone who thinks that taking Sundays off is a slander of Buddhism would be unable to live harmoniously in society.

"Music and art, as well, are often influenced by religion. Yet, there is a difference between appreciating a work of art and believing in the religion that inspired it. Therefore, there is no need to think that you must avoid viewing such artwork or that listening to certain pieces of music constitutes slander. If having faith meant that you could no longer admire fine works of art, then that faith would be denying your humanity."

Some religions exist for the sake of people's happiness, and others exist only for the sake of religion. Religion for the sake of religion descends into dogmatism, ultimately binding and enslaving people in the name of faith. As a result, people are deprived of their spiritual freedom. Common sense and humanity are also denied, deepening the chasm between that religion and society.

Nichiren Buddhism is a people-focused religion, aiming to bring about a flowering of humanity in each person. A religious leader in the realm of Nichiren Buddhism who discusses the Daishonin's teachings but declares such humanistic pursuits as art and culture to be slander of the Law is in fact a dogmatic bigot who tramples upon the Daishonin's very spirit. The actions of such a person only serve to distort Nichiren Buddhism and block the way toward worldwide kosen-rufu.

From The New Human Revolution, volume 1, "Sunrise" chapter.

In response to the question: "One of my friends who lives in the same neighborhood occasionally asks me to mind her children so that she can go to church. It would ruin our friendship if I told her 'I'm not going to look after your children while you go off to church!' What should I do?"

"This is America. Therefore, please have a big, magnanimous heart as vast as this great land itself. What your friend chooses to do while you mind her children is up to her. You are looking after her children out of friendship. In the process, you are also enabling your friend to form a connection to Buddhism. So there's absolutely no need for you to be anxious or nervous about what you're doing.

"As disciples of Nichiren Daishonin, it is natural that we take a strict stance in clarifying what is true and what is erroneous in terms of the teaching. But at the same time, our interactions with others must be based on a spirit of tolerance and generosity. This is the correct way of life for a Buddhist.

"To take a strict stance in distinguishing between truth and error and to show generosity toward others, these two things are in no way incompatible and are essentially part of the same whole."

Shin'ichi then went on to recount how Nichiren Daishonin embarked on a bold campaign of refuting erroneous teachings and clarifying the true ones, out of his profound compassion to enable all humankind to attain happiness.

The Daishonin, Shin'ichi said, realized that if people were to persist in their belief that the partial truth of the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings constituted the highest truth, they would not be able to embrace faith in the Lotus Sutra, the essence of Buddhism, and would thereby destine themselves to unhappiness. Determined to stop this, the Daishonin, citing four dictums, waged an unrelenting battle against the corrupt and degenerate priests of his time who, with the support of the ruling authorities, were spreading incorrect and misleading doctrines throughout the land.

Note on terminology: The four dictums are four statements with which Nichiren Daishonin denounced the four most influential Buddhist schools of his time in Japan, namely the Pure Land school (also known as Nembutsu school), the Zen school, the True Word school, and the Precepts school.

He knew that if he ignored or failed to challenge such error, he would only be encouraging it and allowing it to run rampant. His struggle, however, took the form of dialogue known as shakubuku, the spiritual and intellectual struggle to awaken other human beings. From beginning to end, his struggle was based on the power of speech and the written word. And despite being subjected to life-threatening persecutions, he upheld the spirit of nonviolence throughout.

Note on terminology: Shakubuku is a method of expounding Buddhism by refuting another's attachment to erroneous teachings and thus leading that person to the correct teaching. The term "shakubuku" is used in contrast to "shoju," which means to lead another gradually to the correct teaching in accord with that person's capacity. These two kinds of practice are described in the Shrimala Sutra, T'ien-t'ai's Great Concentration and Insight, and other works. In Nichiren Buddhism, the term "shakubuku" is also often used synonymously with propagating or sharing the Mystic Law.

Shin'ichi addressed the woman who had asked the question: "For that reason, there is no contradiction between the spirit of shakubuku, that of 'refuting the erroneous and revealing the true,' and true friendship. The spirit of compassion is fundamental to both. Therefore, the more we exert ourselves in faith, the more warmly and generously we should embrace our friends and deepen our friendships. Because shakubuku is an endeavor to touch the lives of others through dialogue, trust and friendship are essential.

"Please become a person who rises above differences of religion, praying for the happiness of your fellow human beings and forging deep ties of friendship with many people. Your doing so will also testify to the depth and breadth of Buddhism."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 1, "Light of Compassion" chapter.

Section 29.8: Buddhism Teaches a Path of Life and Humanity

President Ikeda explains that Nichiren Buddhism is a humanistic teaching that offers positive direction for our lives, and describes how the Soka Gakkai is putting the spirit of Buddhist humanism into action in the present day.

Nichiren Buddhism is about human beings. My focus is also human beings.

The human being, the individual, is of utmost importance. Nationality, social position, ideology, none of these matter. The human being is the foundation. My efforts, too, are always aimed at people.

Everything depends upon the person, the individual, how we act and behave as human beings.

I believe that the world as a whole is also moving toward humanism, toward giving top priority to human beings.

Buddhism's original purpose was to teach human beings the best way to live.

Shakyamuni taught a path of humanity that all of us should follow.

Some may think of Buddhism as belonging to a realm separate from everyday human existence. And it is a fact that clerics often describe the Buddhist teachings in this way to reinforce their own spiritual authority.

But this is not genuine Buddhism. It is not Buddhism as conceived by Shakyamuni. His teaching revealed and elucidated an eternal, universal path of life and humanity.

Shakyamuni described his enlightenment under the bodhi tree as follows:

"Suppose a man wandering through a remote forest found a path traveled by people of former times. He followed it and came upon a once-populous ancient capital, now deserted. It was a splendid city surrounded by groves and dotted with beautiful lotus ponds. After returning home, the man informed the king of what he had seen and requested that he renovate the old capital. The king did so, and later many people followed that same path and went to live there, making it prosperous again. Similarly, while seated under the bodhi tree, I saw the ancient way traveled by the Enlightened Ones of the past. And I taught it to people, so that it became known to many, flourished, and spread as it has today."

This quote comes from the Nidanasamyutta, in The Connected Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Samyutta Nikaya, translated by Bhikkhu Bodhi and published by Wisdom Publications in 2000.

Though Shakyamuni taught a path for human beings to live by, Buddhism gradually shifted away from this focus on people. It grew increasingly formalized and took on an air of mysticism. The extreme manifestation of this shift is that its spiritual leaders, members of the clergy, who should have been striving to lead lives of great dignity and substance, strayed farthest from the path of true humanity.

Shakyamuni rejected the highly ritualistic religions of his day and taught a way for human beings to live their lives to the fullest. But after his passing, his teachings eventually lapsed into decline.

The Latter Day of the Law is the period when this decline reached its lowest level, and it was at such a time that Nichiren Daishonin was born.

The Daishonin famously declared: "The purpose of the appearance in this world of Shakyamuni Buddha, the lord of teachings, lies in his behavior as a human being" (WND-1, 852). This was a revolutionary statement, as groundbreaking as the observation by Copernicus that the Earth revolves around the sun. It returned to the fundamental spirit of Buddhism, a teaching that by the Daishonin's time had become steeped in ritual and formality.

The essence of Buddhism lies in one's behavior as a human being, and it was to set an example of such behavior that Shakyamuni made his appearance in the world. The Daishonin tells us that anything that strays from this truth is secondary and unimportant. He attempted to restore Buddhism, which over long centuries had grown formalistic and rigid, to its original spirit. He was ultimately leading a revolution to turn it back into the humanistic teaching it had been to begin with, a religion for the sake of human beings.

The Soka Gakkai has today revived Buddhism's fundamental focus on the behavior of the human being, especially as expressed through bodhisattva practice. It has returned to the starting point of Buddhism, breathing new life into the Daishonin's teaching. That is why the privileged ruling hierarchy within the priesthood has always tried to suppress or attack us. But we are firmly convinced that the path of humanism we pursue embodies the essence of the Buddhist way and the true spirit of religious reformation that the Daishonin cherished.

Therefore, as Soka Gakkai members upholding the correct teaching, let us continue to expand even further our united network of sincere and good-hearted individuals. I hope that each of you will strive to become a cornerstone of these endeavors, promoting solidarity among people of goodwill throughout society, whether or not they embrace the Gohonzon.

From a speech at an SGI-Philippines executive conference, the Philippines, May 9, 1993.
