Chapter 3: The Practice for Transforming Our State of Life

Section 3.1: The Gohonzon—the Fundamental Object of Devotion

Nichiren Buddhism teaches the importance of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith in the Gohonzon in order to transform our lives and manifest the life state of Buddhahood. Here, President Ikeda explains the meaning of the Gohonzon as the fundamental object of devotion.

The Japanese word honzon means "object of fundamental respect or devotion"—in other words, the object that we respect and devote ourselves to as the basis of our lives. It is only natural, therefore, that what we take as our object of devotion will have a decisive impact on the direction of our lives.

Traditionally, objects of devotion in Buddhism were often statues of the Buddha. In some cases, paintings of the Buddha were used. While statues of the Buddha did not exist in early Buddhism, they later began to appear in the Gandhara region of northwest India, due to the influence of Hellenic culture. They were, if you like, a product of cultural exchange on the ancient Silk Road. Through statues and paintings, people became familiar with the image of the Buddha, leading them to arouse faith in the Buddha and revere him.

The object of devotion in Nichiren Buddhism, however, is the Gohonzon, which consists of written characters. In that sense, rather than simply a visual or graphic depiction, I would call it the highest and noblest expression of the world of the intellect, of the great wisdom of the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law. In this respect alone, Nichiren Daishonin's object of devotion is fundamentally different from those traditionally worshipped in Buddhism.

Written words are wondrous; they have tremendous power. Take people's names, for example. When people sign their names, it embodies everything about them—their character, social position, power, emotional and physical condition, personal history, and karma.

Similarly, the daimoku of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which is inscribed down the center of the Gohonzon, encompasses all things in the universe. All phenomena are expressions of the Mystic Law, as the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai indicates when he states in Great Concentration and Insight: "Arising is the arising of the essential nature of the Law, or Dharma nature, and extinction is the extinction of that nature."

The true aspect of the ever-changing universe, or all phenomena, is perfectly expressed, just as it is, in the Gohonzon. The true aspect of the macrocosm of the universe is exactly the same for the microcosm of each of our lives. This is what the Daishonin tells us in his writings. In addition, the Gohonzon expresses the enlightened life state of Nichiren Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law.

In that sense, the Gohonzon inscribed by the Daishonin is an embodiment of the fundamental law of the universe that should be revered by all people; it is the true object of fundamental devotion.

The universe contains both positive and negative workings or functions. Representatives of the Ten Worlds are all depicted on the Gohonzon—from the Buddhas Shakyamuni and Many Treasures, who represent the world of Buddhahood, to Devadatta, who represents the world of hell. The Daishonin teaches that such representatives of the positive and negative workings of the universe are all without exception illuminated by the light of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, enabling them to display "the dignified attributes that they inherently possess," and that this is the function of the Gohonzon.

When we do gongyo and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo before the Gohonzon, both the positive and negative tendencies in our lives begin to manifest "the dignified attributes that they inherently possess." The world of hell with its painful suffering, the world of hungry spirits with its insatiable cravings, the world of asuras with its perverse rage—all come to function to contribute to our happiness and to the creation of value. When we base our lives on the Mystic Law, the life states that drag us toward suffering and unhappiness move in the opposite, positive direction. It is as if sufferings become the "firewood" that fuels the flames of joy, wisdom, and compassion. The Mystic Law and faith are what ignite those flames.

In addition, when we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the positive forces of the universe—represented by all Buddhas, bodhisattvas, and heavenly deities such as Brahma and Shakra, the protective gods of Buddhism—will shine even more brightly, their power and influence increasing and expanding endlessly. The gods of the sun and moon that exist in the microcosm of our lives will also shine brilliantly to illuminate the darkness within. All of the workings—both positive and negative—of the Ten Worlds and the three thousand realms function together at full power, propelling us toward a life of happiness, a life imbued with the four virtues of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity.

In life, it is only natural that we sometimes fall ill. Based on the teaching of the Mystic Law, however, we can look at illness as an inherent part of life. Seeing it this way, we will not be swayed by illness when it happens to us, or allow it to be a source of suffering and distress. Viewed from the perspective of the eternity of life, we are definitely on the way to establishing a "greater self" overflowing with absolute happiness. In addition, we will be able to overcome any obstacle we encounter in life, using it as a springboard for developing a new, more expansive state of being. Life will be enjoyable, and death will be peaceful, marking the solemn departure for our next wonderful lifetime.

When winter arrives, trees are, for a while, bare of flowers and leaves. But they possess the life force to grow fresh green leaves when spring comes. Similar to this, but on an even more profound level, for us, as practitioners of the Mystic Law, death is the dynamic process by which our life itself transitions, without pain, to quickly begin its next mission-filled existence.

This selection is from a speech at an SGI-USA youth training session, U.S.A., February 20, 1990.

Note on terminology: The word Gohonzon is formed in Japanese by appending the honorific prefix go to the word honzon, meaning object of fundamental respect or devotion. The Ten Worlds refer to the realms of hell, hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human beings, heavenly beings, voice-hearers, cause-awakened ones, bodhisattvas, and Buddhas. They are also referred to as the ten life states. Three thousand realms in a single moment of life is a philosophical system established by the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai of China based on the Lotus Sutra. The "three thousand realms" indicates the varying aspects that life assumes at each moment.

Section 3.2: "Never Seek This Gohonzon outside Yourself"

In this selection, President Ikeda explains the profound principle of tapping the power of the Gohonzon in our lives. The immeasurable life force and limitless wisdom expressed by the Gohonzon are also inherent in our lives, and our Buddhist faith and practice enable us to exercise them with unrestricted freedom.

In any religion, the object of worship or devotion holds a place of prime importance. What, then, is the true meaning of the object of devotion, or the Gohonzon, in Nichiren Buddhism?

In "The Real Aspect of the Gohonzon," the Daishonin states: "Never seek this Gohonzon outside yourself. The Gohonzon exists only within the mortal flesh of us ordinary people who embrace the Lotus Sutra and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo." Discussing this passage in one of his lectures, Mr. Toda said:

"Although we may pray to this great Gohonzon thinking it exists outside us, the reality is that it resides directly within the lives of us who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith in the Gohonzon of the Three Great Secret Laws. This passage from the Daishonin is truly inspiring.

"Those who do not yet have faith in the Mystic Law are people at the 'stage of being a Buddha in theory,' which is the first of the six stages of practice, where the Buddha nature, while appearing vaguely to be present, does not function in the least. We, Soka Gakkai members, on the other hand, because we chant to the Gohonzon, are at the 'stage of hearing the name and words of the truth,' which is the second of the six stages of practice. At this stage, the Gohonzon already shines brilliantly within us.

"However, the degree to which it shines will differ depending upon the strength of each person's faith. It's like a light bulb. A high-watt light bulb shines brightly, and a low-watt light bulb shines faintly.

"To continue with the analogy of a light bulb, for those who haven't yet embraced the Mystic Law, the light bulb isn't connected to a power source. Whereas for us, practitioners of the Mystic Law, the light bulb that is the Gohonzon is turned on. Therefore, our lives shine brightly."

Everything depends on the strength of our faith. When we have strong faith, our life itself becomes a "cluster of blessings," which is how the Daishonin describes the Gohonzon. He further states: "This Gohonzon also is found only in the two characters for faith."

People of strong faith, therefore, never reach a deadlock. No matter what happens, they can transform everything into a source of benefit and happiness. Naturally, in the long course of our lives, we are bound to encounter various kinds of problems and suffering. But we will be able to turn all difficulties into nourishment for developing a higher state of life. In this respect, for practitioners of the Daishonin's Buddhism, everything is ultimately a source of benefit and happiness at the most profound level. The word "unhappiness" does not exist in the vocabulary of those who have strong faith.

Toward the end of his Commentary on "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," Nichikan Shonin, a great restorer of Nichiren Buddhism who began the task of systematizing the Daishonin's teachings, writes:

"When we embrace faith in this object of devotion, the Gohonzon, and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, our lives immediately become the object of devotion of three thousand realms in a single moment of life; they become the life of Nichiren Daishonin. This is the true meaning of the phrase 'he, the Buddha, then adorned the necks of the ignorant people of the latter age with the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo.' Therefore, we must venerate the power of the Buddha and the power of the Law and strive to develop our own power of faith and power of practice. We must not spend our lives in vain and regret it for all eternity, as the Daishonin says."

In this passage, Nichikan Shonin clearly states that, through faith in the Gohonzon, our lives can instantly manifest the object of devotion and life state of Nichiren Daishonin. It was for this very purpose that the Daishonin inscribed the Gohonzon. Here, we find the supreme essence of Nichiren Buddhism.

Faith enables us to manifest the Gohonzon that exists within us; it allows us to bring forth the diamond-like state of the Buddha and make it shine brightly.

Within the depths of our lives, we each inherently possess boundless life force and a wellspring of infinite wisdom. Faith allows us to freely tap that inner life force and wisdom.

Mr. Toda often used to say: "What's inside you comes out. What's not there, won't." The strong and pure state of Buddhahood and the weak and base states of hell, hunger, and animality all exist within our lives and are manifested in response to causes and conditions in our environment.

Since life is eternal throughout the three existences of past, present, and future, our past karma may also assail us in the present in the form of some major problem or suffering. However, just as the cause of suffering lies within our lives, we also possess the power to transform our suffering into happiness. This is the power of the life state of Buddhahood.

As Mr. Toda declared, ultimately human beings are the product of what lies inside them, no more, no less.

It's vital, therefore, that we each cultivate the "earth" of our lives and put down deep and extensive "roots" of happiness. We must manifest the Gohonzon that exists within us and forge a self that is as unshakable as a mighty tree. In terms of our life state, this will be expressed as outstanding humanity and exemplary behavior, while in terms of our daily lives, it will manifest as benefit and good fortune.

The crucial point is whether we have faith. We must never make light of the Daishonin's assertion that "It is the heart that is important."

What matters is not form or a person's position or wealth. Those who have faith in their hearts are truly happy.

This selection is from a speech at a representatives gathering, Tokyo, April 3, 1993.

Section 3.4: The Real Aspect and Power of the Gohonzon

President Ikeda discusses the significance and layout of the Gohonzon, citing passages from the writings of Nichiren Daishonin and the Lotus Sutra.

Nichiren Daishonin states that he inscribed the Gohonzon as the "banner of propagation of the Lotus Sutra." In other words, it is the object of devotion for kosen-rufu—that is, for accomplishing the wide propagation of the Mystic Law. In "The Real Aspect of the Gohonzon," he says:

"How wondrous it is that, around two hundred years and more into the Latter Day of the Law, I was the first to reveal as the banner of propagation of the Lotus Sutra this great mandala, the Gohonzon of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, that even those such as the learned Indian Buddhist monks Nagarjuna and Vasubandhu, and the Great Teachers of China T'ien-t'ai and Miao-lo were unable to express."

Carrying on the Daishonin's spirit, the Soka Gakkai is propagating the "object of devotion for kosen-rufu" that the Daishonin, while enduring great persecution, inscribed for the happiness of the people of the Latter Day of the Law.

The Daishonin models the Gohonzon after the Ceremony in the Air as depicted in the Lotus Sutra when the "Life Span" chapter, the sixteenth chapter, is being expounded. The "Life Span" chapter reveals the eternity of the Mystic Law on three levels: the eternity of the Buddha, which is the true effect; the eternity of living beings, which is the true cause; and the eternity of the land, which is the true land. These three are together referred to as the three mystic principles.

The significance of the Ceremony in the Air becomes clear with the integration of the three mystic principles in the "Life Span" chapter. The Ceremony in the Air symbolically reveals that the Buddha, the living beings, and the land are all entities of the eternal Mystic Law. In other words, the eternal Mystic Law pervades the entire universe. Nichiren Daishonin expressed this Law as Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

In "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," the Daishonin discusses the aspect or layout of the Gohonzon in detail.

The true object of devotion is described as follows:

"The treasure tower sits in the air above the saha world that the Buddha of the essential teaching identified as the pure and eternal land; Myoho-renge-kyo appears in the center of the tower with the Buddhas Shakyamuni and Many Treasures seated to the right and left, and, flanking them, the four bodhisattvas, followers of Shakyamuni, led by Superior Practices. Manjushri, Maitreya, and the other bodhisattvas, who are all followers of the four bodhisattvas, are seated below. All the other major and minor bodhisattvas, whether they are disciples of the Buddha in his transient status or of the Buddhas of the other worlds, are like commoners kneeling on the ground in the presence of nobles and high-ranking court officials. The Buddhas who gathered from the other worlds in the ten directions all remain on the ground, showing that they are only temporary manifestations of the eternal Buddha and that their lands are transient, not eternal and unchanging."

In form, the Gohonzon depicts a multi-tiered structure, with the treasure tower of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as its central axis. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in the center indicates the fundamental truth. Since Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the central axis of life and the universe, it is expressed by the treasure tower that soars up in the center of the Ceremony in the Air.

On either side are the Buddhas Shakyamuni and Many Treasures, who represent functions of Myoho-renge-kyo. Many Treasures is the Buddha of the past, signifying eternal truth, and represents the Law as the object of wisdom, or that which wisdom perceives. Shakyamuni is the Buddha of the present, and represents the wisdom to perceive the Law. Indeed, these are two aspects of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The two Buddhas seated together indicates the "fusion of reality and wisdom."

The important point is that we make neither Shakyamuni nor Many Treasures our object of devotion. Both Shakyamuni and Many Treasures, too, became Buddhas through Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is always Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the fundamental Law for attaining Buddhahood, that we make our object of devotion. In terms of the layout of the Gohonzon, this is clear from Nam-myoho-renge-kyo being written large in the center with Shakyamuni and Many Treasures positioned to either side.

Awakened to Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, Buddhas unfailingly carry out bodhisattva practice to lead all people to enlightenment. The four bodhisattvas—Superior Practices, Boundless Practices, Pure Practices, and Firmly Established Practices—represent such bodhisattva practice.

The reason these four bodhisattvas—the leaders of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth—all have "practices" in their names, as indicated by the Chinese character that means "practice" or "action," is that they express their wisdom of enlightenment as action. That is to say, they exhibit actions that are "superior," "boundless," "pure," and "unwavering" based on infinite life force that is one with the Mystic Law.

They can be said to correspond to the four noble virtues of Buddhahood—a state of life that is forever secure, which is eternity and true self, refreshed, which is purity, and joyful, which is happiness.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth, displaying the power inherent in life, seek to protect and free from suffering all living beings and the entire world.

The Daishonin says that all the other major and minor bodhisattvas of the theoretical teaching and those from other lands are not elevated into the air but are "on the ground." These bodhisattvas could be said to represent various altruistic practices, or concrete actions taken to further the enlightenment of all people according to their individual circumstances.

These bodhisattvas are innumerable, and therefore they cannot all be depicted in the Gohonzon. Nevertheless, the Gohonzon unmistakably includes all of their benefit.

Each of these beings of the Ten Worlds who have gathered before the treasure tower of the Mystic Law express a part of the functions of the Mystic Law. Illuminated by the light of the Mystic Law, they embody the Mystic Law and "display the dignified attributes that they inherently possess." Displaying their unique character, they express the richness of the Mystic Law. This is the meaning of "illuminating and manifesting one's true nature."

When the light of the sun passes through a prism, it divides into a continuous spectrum of colors from red to violet. Sunlight is the totality of these individual colors, each being a component of that light. The light of the sun contains countless hues. Therefore, when it shines on something, some of its colors are absorbed and some are reflected back, producing the various shades we see.

The Mystic Law is the ultimate source of life. It gives birth to and encompasses all things. Illuminated by the sunlight of this all-inclusive Mystic Law, everything shines with rich individuality.

The Daishonin explains that myo, of myoho or Mystic Law, has three meanings: to open, to be fully endowed, and to revive. The benefit of the Gohonzon naturally includes these three functions. The Gohonzon, or Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, has the power to unlock the Buddha nature in all people; it contains all benefit and embraces all capacities; and it has the revitalizing power to liberate people from any kind of negative karma and misery. In short, it has the power to enable everything to display its highest potential. It is a life-giving teaching.

The Ceremony in the Air is a "realm transcending time and space." It does not take place in some historically specific time or place. That is precisely why we are able to join in the Ceremony in the Air anytime and anywhere.

By chanting to the Gohonzon, which is modeled on the Ceremony in the Air, we become one with the eternal and universal life in the present, and we open a state of life in which we can survey the entire universe from right where we are. Through our daily practice of gongyo and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we join the eternal Ceremony in the Air here and now. We cause the treasure tower to shine within us and in our daily lives and activities. That is the wonder of the Gohonzon. A magnificent "cosmos" of life opens to us, and reality presents itself as a world of value creation.

This selection is from The World of Nichiren Daishonin's Writings, volume 2, published in Japanese in January 2004.

Note on terminology: The Ceremony in the Air is one of the three assemblies described in the Lotus Sutra, in which the entire gathering is suspended in space above the saha world. The heart of this ceremony is the revelation of the Buddha's original enlightenment in the remote past and the transfer of the essence of the sutra to the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, who are led by Bodhisattva Superior Practices. Fusion of reality and wisdom refers to the fusion of the objective reality or truth and the subjective wisdom to realize that truth, which is the Buddha nature inherent within one's life. The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

Section 3.5: The Gohonzon Is the "Mirror" That Reflects Our Lives

Discussing one of Nichiren's writings in which he likens the Gohonzon to a mirror that reflects our mind, President Ikeda describes how chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo before the Gohonzon enables us to polish our lives.

I would like to speak about an important point with regard to our attitude in faith through the analogy of mirrors. In Buddhism, mirrors have a wide variety of meanings and are often used to explain and illustrate various doctrines. Here, I would like to briefly discuss an example related to our Buddhist practice.

Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"A bronze mirror will reflect the form of a person but it will not reflect that person's mind. The Lotus Sutra, however, reveals not only the person's form but that person's mind as well. And it reveals not only the mind; it reflects, without the least concealment, that person's past actions and future as well."

Mirrors reflect our face and outward form. The mirror of Buddhism, however, reveals the intangible aspect of our lives. Mirrors, which function by virtue of the laws of light and reflection, are a product of human ingenuity. On the other hand, the Gohonzon, based on the law of the universe and life, is the ultimate expression of Buddha wisdom. It enables us to attain Buddhahood by providing us with a means to perceive the true reality of our lives. Just as a mirror is indispensable for grooming our face and hair, we need a mirror of life that allows us to look closely at ourselves and our lives if we are to lead a happier and more beautiful existence.

In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," the Daishonin writes:

"A tarnished mirror will shine like a jewel when polished. A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena, or Dharma nature, and the true aspect of reality."

Originally, every person's life is a brilliantly shining mirror. Differences arise depending on whether one polishes this mirror. A polished mirror corresponds to the life state of the Buddha, whereas a tarnished mirror corresponds to that of an ordinary unenlightened being. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is how we polish our lives. Not only do we undertake this practice ourselves, we also endeavor to teach others about the Mystic Law so that they can make the mirror of their lives shine brightly, too. In this respect, we could be called master "mirror polishers" in the realm of life. Even though people work hard at polishing their appearance, they often tend to neglect polishing their lives. While they fret over blemishes on their face, they remain unconcerned about blemishes in the depths of their lives!

In the famous novel The Picture of Dorian Gray by Oscar Wilde, the youthful protagonist, Dorian Gray, is so handsome that he is called a "young Adonis." An artist who wishes to immortalize Dorian's beauty paints his portrait. It is a brilliant work, an embodiment of Dorian's youthfulness and beauty. It is then that something mysterious begins to happen. Dorian's beauty does not fade, even as he is gradually tempted by a friend into a life of hedonism and immorality. Although the years go by, he remains as youthful and radiant as ever. Strangely, however, the portrait begins to turn ugly and lusterless, reflecting Dorian's dissolute life.

Then, one day, Dorian cruelly breaks a young woman's heart, driving her to commit suicide. At that time, the face in the portrait takes on an evil and savage expression that is frightening to behold. As Dorian's disreputable behavior continues, so does the hideous transformation of the portrait. Dorian is filled with horror. This picture would forever portray the face of his soul in all its ugliness. Even if he were to die, it would continue to eloquently convey the truth.

Though Dorian makes a token effort to be a better person, the picture does not change. He decides to destroy the portrait, thinking that if it were gone, he would be able to break free from his past. So he plunges a knife into the painting. At that moment, hearing screams, his neighbors rush over to find a portrait of the handsome, young Dorian and, collapsed before it, an aged, repulsive-looking man, Dorian, with a knife sticking in his chest. The painting had been a portrait of Dorian's soul, his inner face, into which the effects of his actions had been etched without the slightest omission.

Though we can cover imperfections on our face with cosmetics, we cannot conceal imperfections on the inner face of our lives. The law of cause and effect is strict and inexorable.

Buddhism teaches that unseen virtue brings about visible reward. In the world of Buddhism, everything counts. Being two-faced or pretentious, therefore, serves us absolutely no purpose.

Our inner face that is engraved with the positive and negative causes we make is to an extent reflected in our appearance. There is also a saying "The face is the mirror of the mind."

Just as we look into a mirror when we groom our face, we need a mirror that reflects the depths of our life to beautifully polish our inner face. This mirror is none other than the Gohonzon for "observing the mind."

In "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," Nichiren Daishonin explains the meaning of "observing the mind," saying: "Only when we look into a clear mirror do we see, for the first time, that we are endowed with all six sense organs," meaning eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind.

Similarly, "observing the mind" means to perceive that one's mind, or life, contains the Ten Worlds, and in particular, the world of Buddhahood. It was to enable people to do this that Nichiren Daishonin bestowed the Gohonzon for "observing the mind" upon all humankind.

In his Commentary on "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," Nichikan Shonin likens the Gohonzon to a mirror, stating: "The true object of devotion can be compared to a clear mirror."

And in The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin says: "The five characters Myoho-renge-kyo, embodied in the Gohonzon, similarly reflect the ten thousand phenomena, meaning all phenomena, not overlooking a single one of them." The Gohonzon is the clearest of all mirrors, reflecting the entire universe exactly as it is. When we chant before the Gohonzon, we can perceive the true nature of our lives and manifest the world of Buddhahood.

Our attitude or determination in faith is perfectly reflected in the mirror of the Gohonzon and mirrored in the universe. This accords with the principle of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life."

In a letter to Abutsu-bo, one of his loyal disciples on Sado Island, the Daishonin writes: "You may think you offered gifts to the treasure tower of the Thus Come One Many Treasures, but that is not so. You offered them to yourself."

An attitude in faith that reveres and honors the Gohonzon dignifies and honors the treasure tower of our own lives. When we chant before the Gohonzon, all Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the universe will instantly lend their support and protection. On the other hand, if we slander the Gohonzon, the opposite will be true, meaning such support and protection will not be forthcoming. Accordingly, our attitude or mind is extremely important. Our deep-seated attitude or determination in faith has a subtle and far-reaching influence.

There may be times, for instance, when you feel reluctant to do gongyo or take part in Soka Gakkai activities. That state of mind will be unerringly reflected in the universe, as if on the surface of a clear mirror. The heavenly deities will then also feel reluctant to play their part, and they will naturally fail to exert their full protective powers.

On the other hand, when you joyfully do gongyo and carry out activities for kosen-rufu with the determination to accumulate even more good fortune in your life, the heavenly deities will be delighted and actively function to support you. If you are going to take some action anyway, it is to your advantage to do so willingly and joyfully.

If you carry out your Buddhist practice reluctantly with a sense that it's a waste of time, doubt and complaint will erase your benefits. Of course, if you continue in this way, you will fail to perceive any benefit from your practice, only further reconfirming your incorrect conviction that there's no point in practicing. This is a vicious circle. If you practice Nichiren Buddhism filled with doubt and skepticism, you will get results that are, at best, vague and unsatisfactory. This is the reflection of your own weak conviction in faith on the mirror of the universe. On the other hand, when you stand up with strong conviction in faith, you will accrue limitless good fortune and benefit.

It's important that we vibrantly open up and free our mind of faith, which is both extremely subtle and far-reaching, while striving for self-mastery. When we do so, both our life and state of mind will expand limitlessly, and every action we take will become a source of benefit. Deeply mastering the subtle and far-reaching workings of the mind is the key to faith and to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

There is a Russian proverb that says: "Don't blame the mirror if your face is awry." The reflection in the mirror is our own. But some people get angry with the mirror!

In the same way, our happiness or unhappiness is entirely a reflection of the positive and negative causes accumulated in our lives. We cannot blame others for our misfortunes. This is even more so in the realm of faith.

There is a Japanese folk tale about a small village where no one had a mirror. In those days, mirrors were priceless. A man, returning from a trip to the capital, handed his wife a mirror as a souvenir. It was the first time for her to see one. Looking into the mirror, she exclaimed: "Who on earth is this woman? You must've brought a girl back with you from the capital!" And so a big fight ensued.

Though this is an amusing anecdote, many people become angry or distraught over phenomena that are actually nothing but a reflection of their own lives—their state of mind and the causes that they have created. Like the wife in the story who exclaims, "Who on earth is this woman?" they do not realize their own folly.

Ignorant of the mirror of life of Buddhism, such people cannot see themselves as they really are. And ignorant of their own true self, they naturally cannot give proper guidance and direction to others, nor can they discern the true nature of occurrences in society.

This selection is from a speech at an SGI-USA women's division meeting, U.S.A., February 27, 1990.

Section 3.6: The Profound Meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

What is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, and what is the significance of the practice of chanting it? In this selection, President Ikeda refers to passages of the Daishonin's writings to explain the fundamentals of Nichiren Buddhism.

The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo contains immeasurable benefit, for it enables us to summon forth in our own lives the limitless power of the Mystic Law, the fundamental law of the universe.

Nichiren Daishonin stood up to actualize happiness for all humankind through the boundless beneficial power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The doctrinal basis for this endeavor is set forth with great simplicity and conciseness in the opening passage of his writing "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime":

"If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life."

This passage encapsulates the profound principles of Buddhism and the history of the religious revolution to bring about the enlightenment of all people. Each word and phrase is infused with the sublime wisdom of Buddhism.

The Daishonin's reference to "the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning" is premised on the concept of transmigration, according to which living beings undergo an unceasing, suffering-filled cycle of birth and death that continues from the infinite past into the infinite future. Buddhism holds that this never-ending round of suffering ultimately arises from earthly desires, and that a negative cycle of earthly desires, karma, and suffering is part and parcel of transmigration. In this sense, "the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning" also represent an interminable succession of delusion and suffering.

Because the thought of such endless transmigration is ultimately unbearable, people naturally came to wish for a way to put an end to this painful cycle of birth and death and free themselves from the chains of delusion and suffering.

In Buddhism, there are two basic approaches to liberation from the suffering of this cycle. One view holds that people can free themselves from the endless karmic cycle of birth and death by eradicating earthly desires believed to cause it. The other is the Mahayana approach, in which the essence of life that undergoes transmigration is not viewed as a transient, impermanent phenomenon.

The Mahayana teachings, for example, espouse the concept of undergoing the cycle of birth and death in accordance with the bodhisattva vow to guide living beings to enlightenment; or they view the alternation between birth and death itself as a cycle of emerging from and returning to the fundamental, all-embracing life of the universe. The latter view can be easily understood using the metaphor of waves on the ocean: birth is like a wave appearing on the surface of the ocean—the life of the universe—while death is the wave submerging back into that ocean. Gaining such an understanding of the essence of our own lives, which repeat the cycle of birth and death, is to attain "unsurpassed enlightenment," the highest awakening of the Buddha.

In this passage, to "perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings" means to "attain unsurpassed enlightenment." The wisdom to apprehend this universally inherent truth represents the supreme enlightenment of the Buddha.

The point where Buddhism radically departs from the philosophies and religions that preceded it is that it uncovered within the individual's own life the Law, or limitless inner power, for resolving all suffering on the most essential level. A Buddha is one who, based on this Law, has attained the ultimate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and construct unshakable happiness.

Buddhism is a teaching of unparalleled humanism that stresses the boundless potential within human beings. That's why it is called the "internal way."

To "perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings" is to "attain unsurpassed enlightenment," and is the sole means for freeing oneself from "the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning." This is Shakyamuni's starting point, and the ultimate conclusion of Buddhist thought. The scripture that gives highest expression to this philosophy of the internal way is the Lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people can attain enlightenment. The Lotus Sutra could be said to embody the ultimate principle of respect for human dignity.

In this writing, "On Attaining Buddhahood in this Lifetime," the Daishonin says that the "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings" is the "principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena." This latter principle refers to the inscrutable relationship that exists between ourselves—our minds or each life-moment—and the universe; its meaning is that all phenomena are contained in one's life and that one's life pervades all phenomena.

The life of the universe enfolds and pervades everything, and because it does so, it is also inherent in all things. The oneness of the life of the universe and our individual lives lies at the heart of the "principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena." To awaken to this mystic truth is to attain the Buddha's "unsurpassed enlightenment."

The question is how to enable all people to perceive this "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings." A widely accessible Buddhism will not be possible if only a very limited number of people can follow the way set forth for apprehending the mystic truth.

The initial step the Daishonin took in opening the great path to enlightenment for all people was to name the mystic truth. The universally inherent mystic truth originally had no name, but as the Daishonin explains in "The Entity of the Mystic Law," a sage awakened to this truth in his own life was able to give it the most appropriate name.

Naming something is a creative process. Giving a name that accurately captures the essence of a thing has the important effect of making that essence available to all people; it enables all people to share in its value.

In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," as indicated by the passage "the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings is Myoho-renge-kyo," the Daishonin clearly states that this mystic truth that constitutes the fundamental law of the universe is none other than Myoho-renge-kyo. Strictly speaking, the term Myoho-renge-kyo existed prior to this as the title of the Lotus Sutra, but the Daishonin was the first to identify Myoho-renge-kyo as the name of the principle of the "true aspect of all phenomena," which the Lotus Sutra teaches is the profound wisdom of all Buddhas. Also, although the "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra expounds the life of the eternal Buddha from the standpoint of Shakyamuni, it was the Daishonin who first revealed that the "heart of the 'Life Span' chapter" is Myoho-renge-kyo.

The eternal Buddha, since attaining enlightenment in the remote past, repeatedly undergoes the cycle of birth and death as a Buddha while appearing in various forms within the Ten Worlds to free living beings from suffering. The "Life Span" chapter reveals that living beings of the Ten Worlds, including Buddhas, and both birth and death are all manifestations of the great eternal life of the universe. Because the Daishonin says that the "heart of the 'Life Span' chapter" is Myoho-renge-kyo, we can infer that Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the great, eternal, universal life that is revealed in the "Life Span" chapter.

Living beings in the nine worlds repeatedly undergoing birth and death also follow the rhythm of birth and death of emerging from and submerging back into the great eternal life that is Myoho-renge-kyo. They are embraced by Myoho-renge-kyo, and at the same time possess Myoho-renge-kyo within them. This is why Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the "mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings."

It was the Daishonin who first declared that Myoho-renge-kyo is to be chanted and spread in the Latter Day of the Law.

The Daishonin's next step in opening this great path was to establish the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. He appended the word nam—a transliteration of the Sanskrit word namas, meaning "devotion"—to the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo, and established the practice of invoking this truth.

Nam means "to dedicate one's life." Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo aloud represents a determination and vow to dedicate one's life to the realm of truth of Myoho-renge-kyo in thought, word, and deed.

At the same time, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables each person to actualize a way of life based on the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo. The crucial point in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an external truth. It constitutes a practice to actually summon forth the inner truth that pervades the universe and our own selves and live our lives in accord with that truth. This practice could be described as a process of establishing a self capable of activating and tapping from within the "mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings."

In order to enable all people to perceive and actualize the "mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings," the Daishonin gave it the name Myoho-renge-kyo and established the practice of reciting that name—the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. By doing so, he opened the way for all people to dedicate their lives to and live based on the mystic truth.

The Daishonin thus established the means by which all people can awaken to the fact that the truth of life and the universe exists within their own lives, and actively manifest that truth. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is fully revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no matter what their background. It would be no exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism gave rise to a Buddhism of the people, open to all. This practice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fundamentally transform our lives.

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to summon forth our own innate Buddhahood. It is the direct path to manifesting that highest state of life. The wisdom and compassion of the Buddha that emerge through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enrich our being and bring happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as more and more people come to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance of people filled with the compassion of the Buddha and to ultimately transform even the destiny of humankind.

Another point we should bear in mind regarding the true meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it is also the name of the life of the Buddha of the Latter Day, Nichiren Daishonin. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and the life of Buddha of the Latter Day are indivisibly connected. We could say that the fundamental truth of Myoho-renge-kyo that pervades life and the universe was only identified and established for the first time through the Daishonin himself practicing it and manifesting it in his behavior. He gave concrete expression to the Law that people had not been able to perceive up to that point.

Nichiren Daishonin's life as the Buddha of the Latter Day is none other than a life dedicated to battling evil and vanquishing fundamental ignorance. The struggle to free people from all misfortune and misery in the world, from all karma and the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death, ultimately entails battling the ignorance that gives rise to evil and suffering.

The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, established by the Daishonin for the happiness of oneself and others and the realization of kosen-rufu, has the power to clear the clouds of ignorance. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the sun of the world of Buddhahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the sun, are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance vanishes.

Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching in which the Daishonin alone shines like the sun. It is a teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We are truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same brilliant life state of Buddhahood as Nichiren Daishonin.

This selection is from Lecture on "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," published in Japanese in January 2007.

Note on terminology: True aspect of all phenomena refers to the ultimate truth or reality that permeates all phenomena and is in no way separate from them. Through the explanation of the ten factors, the "Expedient Means" chapter of the Lotus Sutra teaches that all people are inherently endowed with the potential to become Buddhas, and clarifies the truth that they can tap and manifest this potential. Fundamental ignorance is the most deeply rooted illusion inherent in life, said to give rise to all other illusions, the inability to see or recognize the truth, particularly, the true nature of one's life.

Section 3.7: Embracing the Gohonzon Is in Itself Attaining Enlightenment

President Ikeda explains how Nichiren Buddhism views the concept of attaining enlightenment, or Buddhahood.

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the ultimate Law that gives rise to, or is the source of, all Buddhas. To put it another way, the fundamental cause for the enlightenment of all Buddhas is not countless kalpas of practice, but rather awakening to the fundamental Law of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The Buddhist practice for the Latter Day of the Law is to directly embrace Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This is why practice over countless kalpas is not necessary in Nichiren Buddhism.

In his writing "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," Nichiren Daishonin states: "Shakyamuni's practices and the virtues he consequently attained are all contained within the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo. If we believe in these five characters, we will naturally be granted the same benefits as he was."

The practices of Shakyamuni and the Buddhas of the ten directions and three existences to attain enlightenment and the virtues resulting from those practices are all included in Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. For that reason, by embracing the "five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo," we naturally obtain the full benefits enjoyed by Shakyamuni and all Buddhas, and are able to attain Buddhahood.

This is the principle that "embracing the Gohonzon is in itself observing one's own mind, or attaining enlightenment." It is also articulated as "attainment of Buddhahood in one's present form" and "immediate attainment of enlightenment."

The Daishonin says that those who embrace the Mystic Law "can readily become as noble a Buddha as Shakyamuni." The Daishonin's teaching opens the way for all people to reach the same great state of Buddhahood as Shakyamuni. Buddhahood is not a fiction or a metaphor, nor is it restricted to the inconceivably distant future. Nichiren Buddhism enables all people to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

The principle of "embracing the Gohonzon is in itself observing one's own mind" represents a revolution in the concept of attaining Buddhahood. As Mr. Toda explained:

"Just by chanting the single phrase of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith in the Gohonzon, we can carry out the practice for attaining Buddhahood far more easily than the Buddhas described in the 'Expedient Means' chapter of the Lotus Sutra, who practiced for tens of millions of years over countless lifetimes before attaining Buddhahood."

While the widely accepted view of attaining Buddhahood is that it is a long, strenuous uphill climb to reach the summit of enlightenment, Nichiren Buddhism teaches that all people can reach that summit instantly. We can immediately and directly attain the expansive state of Buddhahood here and now, as though suddenly gazing from on high over the mountain peaks below and enjoying a magnificent, 360-degree panorama of the world. We can then go out among the challenging realities of living and share with others the joy of attaining this lofty state of being. This is what is so wonderful and exciting about the practice of Nichiren Buddhism.

This selection is from Lectures on the "Expedient Means" and "Life Span" Chapters of the Lotus Sutra, volume 1, published in Japanese in September 1995.

Note on terminology: Countless kalpas of practice refers to practice toward enlightenment over a period of countless kalpas, one kalpa being approximately 16 million years according to one account. In the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, attaining enlightenment, or Buddhahood, was thought to require countless kalpas of practice over many lifetimes. This idea contrasts with that of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime or in a single lifetime. Embracing the Gohonzon is in itself observing one's own mind means that through faith in the Gohonzon, one can tap the Mystic Law inherent in one's life and attain Buddhahood. Attaining Buddhahood in one's present form means attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime just as one is, without undergoing endless eons of Buddhist practice. Immediately attaining enlightenment means the immediate attainment of Buddhahood based on the doctrine of three thousand realms in a single moment of life, referring to beings in the nine worlds bringing forth their inherent Buddhahood and attaining enlightenment.

Section 3.8: The Mystic Law Exists within Our Lives

President Ikeda explains that by making Buddhism easily accessible to all the Daishonin's teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo represents a great religious revolution.

In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," Nichiren Daishonin sternly cautions: "Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching." "Inferior" here means "incomplete." The Mystic Law is the ultimate truth that is perfect and complete; in contrast, an incomplete teaching sets forth only a partial truth.

The above passage contains a profound philosophy that overcomes one of the serious pitfalls to which religion tends to succumb. It also embodies a crucial philosophy of faith for attaining genuine happiness.

Religion is generally held to be a universal endeavor to connect the human being to the infinite, absolute, and sacred. While in a sense this may be true, it seems that many religions postulate from the outset a separation between the secular and the sacred and between human beings and gods or Buddhas, and thus seek to bridge that gap.

The Daishonin, however, regards teachings that view the absolute or sacred as separate from human beings as incomplete. And he cites as an example the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra Buddhist teachings, which do not set forth the principles or practice that enable ordinary people to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Rather, they espouse that one must first undergo countless kalpas of practice over many lifetimes before enlightenment can be achieved. In the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, a virtually insurmountable gulf exists between Buddhas and ordinary people. As long as that divide exists between the world of Buddhahood and the nine worlds, which is the realm of ordinary beings, it naturally follows that there is no way for all people to attain enlightenment. In this worldview, ordinary people and the idealized Buddhas are poles apart, thus leaving ordinary people with no option but to aspire for salvation through the assistance or intervention of such Buddhas.

This perceived separation between the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood is demolished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life"—in other words, the teaching that "the nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds." Here we can see the immense importance of the Lotus Sutra principle of the "mutual possession of the Ten Worlds."

The Daishonin opened the way to actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This constitutes in its fullest and most complete form the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlightenment for all human beings.

The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the universe. Its universality transcends our individual selves. However, the Mystic Law also exists within our lives. It both resides within us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in our lives because it is the all-embracing Law that pervades everything in the universe.

Regarding the meaning of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the Daishonin further states: "When we revere Myoho-renge-kyo inherent in our own life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature within us is summoned forth and manifested by our chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This is what is meant by 'Buddha.'" The expression "is summoned forth and manifested" points to the profound significance of the Mystic Law.

The Daishonin uses a wonderful metaphor to explain this principle of calling forth and revealing the inner Buddha nature: "When a caged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby summoned and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in the cage strives to get out."

The singing of the caged bird refers to the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo by ordinary people who, shackled in the chains of fundamental ignorance and earthly desires, arouse faith in the Mystic Law. In other words, it is the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith, determined to win over all obstacles and become happy without fail through the power of the Mystic Law.

The power of such strong, resolute chanting calls forth the Buddha nature in all living beings. Not only does the Buddha nature of the protective gods Brahma and Shakra and of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the universe manifest, but those chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can also sever the chains of fundamental ignorance and illusion, and reveal their own Buddha nature. In other words, it is the power of our voices chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that connects our lives with the Mystic Law pervading all phenomena in the universe.

The Daishonin's most important admonition in regard to attaining enlightenment through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that we must not view the Law as something outside ourselves. If we think the Law exists externally, then we are reverting to the kind of divide between Buddhas and ordinary people found in the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings.

Throughout everything, Mr. Toda steadfastly continued to seek the Law that exists nowhere but within our own lives. And he stressed the importance of living true to oneself. His starting point was his profound realization in prison that the Buddha is life itself and his awakening to his identity as a Bodhisattva of the Earth.

He also often spoke of the spirit of faith we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law within us, saying: "You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is your own life!" and "Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day of the Law simply means deciding, 'My life is none other than Nam-myoho-renge-kyo!'" This is the spirit the Daishonin teaches in the passage: "When you chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself."

The Daishonin saw the power of the Mystic Law, which encompasses and sustains all things in the universe, as existing within human beings, and he established a means for actually manifesting that Law in their lives.

It is only by communing and fusing with the power of the eternal, unchanging truth transcending our limited, finite selves, which could be called "other power," that we can wholly activate our own power, which could be called "self power." At the same time, however, this eternal, all-encompassing "other power" actually exists inherently in our lives. The Daishonin writes: "People are certainly self-empowered, and yet they are not self-empowered. People are certainly other-empowered, and yet they are not other-empowered."

What this means, I believe, is that by relying neither exclusively on "other power" nor on "self power," we can bring forth from within us the power that transcends us. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to do this.

In this way, Nichiren Buddhism opens up a broad new vision of a universal religion for the happiness of all humankind—one that transcends the approach of teachings that strictly divide the powers of self and other and that emphasize one over the other.

This selection is from Lecture on "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," published in Japanese in January 2007.

Note on terminology: Mutual possession of the Ten Worlds is the principle that each of the Ten Worlds possesses the potential for all ten within itself. "Mutual possession" means that life is not fixed in one or another of the Ten Worlds, but can manifest any of the ten—from hell to Buddhahood—at any given moment. The important point of this principle is that all beings in any of the nine worlds possess the Buddha nature. This means that every person has the potential to manifest Buddhahood, while a Buddha also possesses the nine worlds and in this sense is not separate or different from ordinary people.

Section 3.9: A Practice Accessible to All

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo comprises the entirety of the practice of Nichiren Buddhism; beyond that, ceremonies and formalities are of no importance.

Nichiren Daishonin sent many letters to his lay follower Toki Jonin. In one of them, titled "On the Four Stages of Faith and the Five Stages of Practice," he outlines the correct Buddhist practice for people in the Latter Day of the Law, clarifying that such practice lies in "making the single word 'faith' the foundation."

The essence of Nichiren Buddhism is not ceremony or formality. It is our heart. It is our faith. The Daishonin further states that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith in the Gohonzon contains within it all other forms of practice. He explains with the following simple allegory: "The two characters that comprise the name Japan contain within them all the people and animals and wealth in the sixty-six provinces of the country, without a single omission." Similarly, he says, the phrase "Nam-myoho-renge-kyo" contains within it the entirety of the Lotus Sutra. Therefore, the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is itself the direct path to attaining Buddhahood. All other practices, especially those entrenched in formality, are secondary practices that, if given primary importance, can become an impediment to faith.

The Daishonin further teaches that even though we may not understand the profound meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can still gain the benefit of chanting daimoku. Here, employing another allegory, he states: "When a baby drinks milk, it has no understanding of its taste, and yet its body is naturally nourished."

Though we may not understand Buddhist doctrine, if we simply chant daimoku free of doubt, then, just as a newborn baby gains nourishment from milk, we will naturally be able to imbue our lives with the great power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Nichiren Buddhism is the Buddhism of the people; it exists for and is accessible to all.

In the same writing, Nichiren Daishonin states: "The five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo do not represent the sutra, meaning the Lotus Sutra text, nor are they its meaning. They are nothing other than the intent of the entire sutra." Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which we chant, is the heart and essence of the Lotus Sutra. Fundamentally, it is the very spirit of Nichiren Daishonin. Accordingly, though we may not grasp its profound meaning entirely, when we chant daimoku with faith in the Gohonzon, we can come into contact with the Daishonin's spirit. We can bring forth within us the life state of the Daishonin that is one with Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. How truly fortunate we are!

This selection is from a speech at an SGI-Italy representatives conference, Italy, July 2, 1992.

Section 3.10: Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Is the Key to Victory in Life

In this excerpt from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto, whose character represents President Ikeda, is speaking in 1966 to members in Peru who have just started practicing Nichiren Buddhism.

Those who challenge themselves earnestly, aligning their lives with the Mystic Law, kosen-rufu, and the SGI, lay the foundations for eternal happiness and realize ultimate victory in life.

I would like all of you to become such great victors. In that connection, allow me today to talk a little about the key requirements for victory.

The first is chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

Our health, courage, wisdom, joy, desire to improve, self-discipline, and so on, could all be said to depend on our life force. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to bring forth limitless life force. Those who base themselves on chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo are therefore never deadlocked.

The important thing is to continue chanting every day, no matter what happens. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the fundamental power of the universe. Please chant resounding daimoku morning and evening with the vibrant and energetic rhythm of majestic horses galloping through the heavens.

When we chant before the Gohonzon, we are facing the Buddha, so we should remember to have a respectful attitude. Other than that, though, we should feel free to express what's in our hearts honestly and directly to the Gohonzon.

The Gohonzon is the embodiment of the Buddha endowed with infinite compassion. We should therefore chant about our desires, our problems, and our aspirations, just as they are. When we're suffering, feeling sad, or experiencing hard times, we should take everything to the Gohonzon with an open heart, like a child who throws itself into its mother's arms and clings to her. The Gohonzon will "listen" to everything. Let's chant as if carrying on a conversation, confiding our innermost thoughts. In time, even hellish sufferings will vanish like the morning dew and seem but a dream.

If, for instance, we recognize that we have done something wrong, we should offer sincere prayers of apology and humbly reflect on our behavior. We can resolve never to repeat the same mistake again and set forth anew.

Also, when we encounter a crucial situation, we can firmly resolve to win and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with the power of a lion's roar or the ferocity of an asura demon, as if to shake the entire universe.

Furthermore, in the evening, we can joyfully chant to the Gohonzon with profound appreciation for that day.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin cites the words: "Morning after morning we rise up with the Buddha, evening after evening we lie down with the Buddha." This means that those who continue to chant in earnest are always together with the Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law. This holds true not only for this lifetime but even beyond death, with the Daishonin and all heavenly deities throughout the universe extending their protection to us. We can therefore feel a deep sense of security from the depths of our being and be free of all fear. We can enjoy and live out our lives with complete confidence.

Chanting transforms suffering into joy, and joy into greater joy. That's why it is important for us to single-mindedly chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, come what may, whether we are feeling happy or sad, in good times or in bad. This is the direct path to happiness.

This selection is from The New Human Revolution, volume 11, "Pioneering New Frontiers" chapter.

Section 3.11: The Lotus Sutra Is a Scripture of Cosmic Humanism

Nichiren Buddhism is based on the Lotus Sutra, the scripture teaching the supreme enlightenment of Shakyamuni Buddha. The pinnacle of the Mahayana teachings, the Lotus Sutra was compiled in the first century CE. It sees the eternal life state of Buddhahood inherent within all people and teaches that anyone can reveal this lofty inner potential. And it calls on practitioners to carry on the struggle to lead people to enlightenment in the evil age after Shakyamuni's death. In this excerpt, President Ikeda discusses the profound meaning contained in the sutra.

"The scripture of the lotus flower of the Law"—the Lotus Sutra is the monarch of all scriptures. As a monarch, it does not reject any other teaching, but acts to enable every other teaching to be fully effective.

Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"Ultimately, all phenomena are contained within one's life, down to the last particle of dust. The nine mountains and the eight seas are encompassed in one's body, and the sun, moon, and myriad stars are found in one's life. We, however, are like a blind person who is incapable of seeing the images reflected in a mirror, or like an infant who has no fear of water or fire. The teachings such as those of the non-Buddhist writings and those of the Hinayana and provisional Mahayana Buddhist scriptures all partially explain the phenomena inherent in one's life. They do not explain them as the Lotus Sutra does."

Teachings apart from the Lotus Sutra offer only partial explanations of the Law of life. Though partially true, they do not have the capacity on their own to revitalize all aspects of life. They are more likely, in fact, to produce distortions. The Lotus Sutra, however, is the single essential Law that unifies all these partial teachings, places them in the proper perspective, and enables them to function effectively.

This is the wisdom of the Lotus Sutra. The "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra likens the wisdom of the Lotus Sutra to "a skilled physician who is wise and understanding." Like a skilled physician, the wisdom of the Lotus Sutra has the power to cure those who are suffering.

The Lotus Sutra seeks to convey in an easily accessible way the truth that each of us has been a Buddha since the eternal past and will be so into the eternal future. And it was Nichiren Daishonin, the votary of the Lotus Sutra in the Latter Day of the Law, who made it possible for all people to actually experience this in their lives.

The Lotus Sutra teaches of a hidden treasure residing within us, as vast as the universe itself, that vanquishes all feelings of helplessness. It teaches us how to live vibrantly and vigorously, in rhythm with the infinite life of the universe. It teaches the true, great adventure of self-transformation.

The Lotus Sutra has a vastness that can enfold all people in a state of peace. It has cultural and artistic richness. It enables us to attain a boundless state forever imbued with the noble virtues of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity, and to live with the confidence, wherever we may be, that "This, my land, remains safe and tranquil."

The Lotus Sutra has the drama of struggles of good over evil. It has a warmth that comforts the weary. It has a vibrant, pulsing courage that banishes all fear. It has joyous songs of living unbounded and at ease throughout past, present, and future. It has soaring freedom.

It has brilliant light, flowers, greenery, music, and scenes like epic works of art or cinema.

It offers brilliant psychology, life lessons, and guidelines for happiness and peace. It presents basic principles for healthy living.

It awakens us to the universal truth that changing our mind-set changes everything. Avoiding both the desolation of individualism and the prison of totalitarianism, it possesses the power for creating a pure land of compassion in which people help and encourage one another.

Both communism and capitalism have reduced people to being a means to an end. But the Lotus Sutra, the monarch of all scriptures, embodies a fundamental humanism in which people are the end, not the means, where people are the protagonists, the monarchs. This message of the Lotus Sutra can be described as a "cosmic humanism"—a magnificent theme to guide the 21st century.

This selection is from The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, volume 1, published in Japanese in March 1996.

Note: In his lecture "A New Humanism for the Coming Century," delivered at the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation in 1997, President Ikeda explained this concept of "cosmic humanism" as "a humanism based on an expansive cosmology, a worldview that sees the individual as being one with the entire universe, expanding and growing with it, and therefore meriting the most profound reverence."

Section 3.12: Gongyo Encompasses the Heart of the Lotus Sutra

President Ikeda illuminates the significance of the "Expedient Means" and "Life Span" chapters of the Lotus Sutra, from which Soka Gakkai members recite passages during gongyo.

I once composed the following poem: Morning and evening, joyously attune your lives to the melody of the universe, as you recite the "Expedient Means" and "Life Span" chapters!

What wonderful efforts we are making toward the creation of peace and happiness when we recite these important chapters that comprise the heart of the Lotus Sutra, the highest of all the Buddhist sutras, and vibrantly chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the supreme teaching of Buddhism and ultimate Law of the universe!

The Lotus Sutra was expounded to enable all living beings to attain enlightenment. When read in terms of its implicit meaning—namely, from the doctrinal standpoint of Nichiren Buddhism—the Lotus Sutra takes on profound significance as an "explanation" of the object of devotion, the Gohonzon of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the fundamental Law that opens the way for the enlightenment of all living beings throughout the entire world into the eternal future of the Latter Day of the Law.

The essence of this sutra is contained in the "Expedient Means" chapter, which expounds the "true aspect of all phenomena," and in the "Life Span" chapter, which reveals the Buddha's "attainment of Buddhahood in the remote past."

From the standpoint of Nichiren Buddhism, the "Expedient Means" chapter praises the wisdom of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the Mystic Law, as infinitely profound and immeasurable, and elucidates the principle that all living beings are Buddhas. In particular, the section that clarifies the "true aspect of all phenomena" and the "ten factors of life," which is the portion that we recite three times during gongyo, indicates that all the ever-changing forms and states of life, meaning all phenomena, are without exception manifestations of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which is the true aspect. The Daishonin writes: "All beings and environments in the Ten Worlds are without exception manifestations of Myoho-renge-kyo." All living beings are inherently entities of the Mystic Law. Therefore, all those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and work for kosen-rufu are assured of attaining the life state of Buddhahood just as they are.

We don't need to go to some faraway place to attain Buddhahood. We don't need to become someone special. We can commune dynamically with the universe as and where we are, and fully reveal the brilliance of our own innate "true aspect"—that is, our true self as an entity of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. That is the purpose of gongyo and the realm of faith. We can bring forth from within us the wisdom, courage, and compassion of the Mystic Law. We therefore have absolutely nothing to fear.

The term "life span" of "The Life Span of the Thus Come One" chapter contains the meaning of measuring the life span and benefits of the Buddha. Read from the perspective of the meaning implicit in its text, this chapter offers a detailed description of the eternal life span and the benefits of the "Thus Come One Nam-myoho-renge-kyo" extending from the infinite past. Here, the eternal nature of life is revealed, along with the fact that this constitutes the true nature of all living beings. Also revealed in this chapter is the mission of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth to spread this great Law and lead all living beings to enlightenment.

The verse section of the "Life Span" chapter, in particular, is a grand paean to the infinitely great, noble, and eternal life force we all possess.

The Daishonin notes that when we combine the Chinese character ji, meaning self, of the opening line of the verse section—"ji ga toku burrai," meaning "Since I attained Buddhahood"—and the final Chinese character shin, meaning body, of the closing line—"soku joju busshin," meaning "quickly acquire the body of a Buddha"—this forms the word jishin, meaning "oneself." From beginning to end, the verse section praises the "self" and the "life" of the Buddha, and, as such, it is also a paean to the state of eternal and absolute freedom inherent in our lives.

The verse section offers direct answers to the ultimate questions that form the basis of all thought, philosophy, and religion—in other words, the timeless questions of life, such as "What is the meaning of our existence?" "What is the true essence of our being?" "Where have we come from and where are we going?" and "What are life and death?" The verse section comprises a teaching of hope and joy with the power to illuminate all humanity and all life for eternity.

In the verse section, we find the lines: "Ga shi do annon. Tennin jo juman," meaning "This, my land, remains safe and tranquil, constantly filled with heavenly and human beings."

There is still immense suffering in the world today—suffering as painful as being "consumed in a great fire." Our noble movement for kosen-rufu, upholding the philosophy of the eternity of life, is firmly committed to creating a world where people live together in happiness and peace—an ideal society that humanity has always longed for. This is the way to secure the right to lead a happy, fulfilled existence for all people in the 21st century, an aspiration shared by countless philosophers, religious leaders, and peace scholars.

This selection is from a speech at a world peace gongyo meeting, Tokyo, September 8, 2002.

Note on terminology: The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

Section 3.13: Gongyo—A Ceremony in Which Our Lives Commune with the Universe

President Ikeda explains the significance of gongyo and daimoku from the profound perspective of the universe and life.

Gongyo—reciting portions of the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—is a ceremony in which our lives commune with the universe. It is an act through which, based on the Gohonzon, we can vibrantly draw forth the life force of the universe within the cosmos of our lives. We exist. We have life. The universe, too, is a giant living entity. Life is the universe and the universe is life. Each of us is a living entity, just like the universe. We are our own miniature universe.

One scholar, observing that the human body is made of the same elements produced by stars, has called human beings "children of the stars." Our bodies are a microcosm of the universe. Not only are they made of the same matter as the universe, but they also follow the same process of generation and disintegration, the same rhythm of life and death, that pervades the cosmos. All physical laws—such as gravity and the conservation of energy—also affect and operate in the microcosm of each living entity.

The Earth takes 365 days, 5 hours, and 48 minutes to complete one revolution around the sun. It, too, operates according to a rigorous order. The human body, meanwhile, is said to have more than 60 trillion individual cells. When they function each day in a well-ordered fashion, correctly carrying out their respective jobs, we enjoy good health. The complexity and precision of the human body are truly wondrous. Likewise, if the Earth were to veer even slightly from its present orbit around the sun, we would be in serious trouble. Everything hangs in a delicate balance, governed by the strict principle that life and the universe are one. The same is true of each individual life—of each microcosm.

Science has directed its attention to the investigation of real, yet invisible, natural laws. Such investigation has led to the invention of many machines and devices that apply those laws. An understanding of the principles of buoyancy, for instance, led to the development of seagoing vessels. Likewise, the discovery of the laws of aerodynamics led to the invention of aircraft, and insight into the workings of electromagnetic waves paved the way for the development of radio and television. These natural laws, however, are only partial laws of the universe.

Buddhism, on the other hand, developed out of the search for and discovery of the ultimate Law of life that is the source and foundation of all other laws and principles. This ultimate Law of life is the Mystic Law.

The Mystic Law is also invisible, yet it, too, exists without a doubt. Nichiren Daishonin inscribed the Gohonzon so that we could bring forth the power of the Mystic Law from within our own lives. That is why Mr. Toda said: "I apologize for using such a simplistic analogy, but the Gohonzon can be likened to a happiness-producing device."

When we do gongyo—recite portions of the Lotus Sutra and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo before the Gohonzon—the microcosm of our individual lives harmonizes seamlessly with the macrocosm of the universe. It is a sublime ceremony, an action through which we fully open the storehouse of treasures within. We can thereby tap into the wellspring of life force in the depths of our own beings. We can access the source of inexhaustible wisdom, compassion, and courage.

The universe, in its essence, is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo; our life is an expression of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo; and the Gohonzon is an embodiment of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Since all three are Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, they are essentially one and indivisible. Therefore, when we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, our life and the universe are aligned around the Gohonzon—meshing together perfectly like cogs in a machine—and we begin to move in the direction of happiness and fulfillment.

We can be in rhythm with the universe 365 days a year—in spring, summer, autumn, and winter—and manifest the life force, wisdom, and good fortune that enables us to surmount any problem or suffering. When we rev up the powerful engine of life force that is Buddhahood, we can break through any impasse and keep moving forward, boldly steering ourselves in the direction of hope and justice.

This selection is from Discussions on Youth, published in Japanese in March 1999.

Section 3.14: Polishing Our Lives through Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

President Ikeda discusses the benefits of our daily practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and reciting portions of the Lotus Sutra.

The Mystic Law is the key to polishing our lives. In "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime," Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena, or Dharma nature, and the true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo."

Our society today is rife with negative influences. People's lives are easily clouded and sullied. That is why we need this fundamental method for polishing and purifying our lives.

A life that has been thoroughly polished by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo shines with wisdom, and this wisdom serves as a beacon guiding the way to victory in life. In "The Benefits of the Teacher of the Law" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, the wisdom of those who uphold the Mystic Law is likened to "a pure bright mirror in which forms and shapes are all reflected." Just as a bright, clear mirror reflects every object as it is, a life that has been well polished can discern the true reality of all things in the world.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin comments on this passage as follows:

"The sutra passage is saying that persons whose six sense organs are pure will be like lapis lazuli or like bright mirrors in which one sees the major world system, or the thousand-millionfold world. Now when Nichiren and his followers chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, they see and understand the ten thousand phenomena, meaning all phenomena, as though these were reflected in a bright mirror."

Lapis lazuli is one of the seven kinds of treasures. The purification of the six sense organs is one of the benefits achieved by practitioners of the Mystic Law that is outlined in the "Benefits of the Teacher of the Law" chapter. In other words, through Buddhist practice, we purify and enhance our mental and perceptual faculties as represented by our eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind—that is, our life in its entirety.

The "bright mirror" of a well-forged and polished life fully reflects the universe, society, and human life. The "bright mirror," fundamentally, is the Gohonzon—in other words, the life of Nichiren Daishonin. In a broader sense, it is the "bright mirror of the single mind of faith" of all those who believe in the Gohonzon as disciples of the Daishonin.

This is the profound significance of faith in the Mystic Law. Through strong faith, we can elevate and transform our lives—spiritually and physically—to their purest and strongest possible state. The purification of our lives through faith is the driving force for our victory as human beings. That is why it is vital for us to persevere in faith until the very end of our lives.

This selection is from a speech at an Arts Division general meeting, Tokyo, May 10, 1987.

Note on terminology: The major world system, also called the thousand-millionfold world, is one of the world systems described in ancient Indian cosmology. The seven kinds of treasures, also called the seven treasures, are seven precious substances. The list differs among the Buddhist scriptures. In the Lotus Sutra, the seven are gold, silver, lapis lazuli, seashell, agate, pearl, and carnelian. Purification of the six sense organs, also called purification of the six senses, refers to the six sense organs of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, body, and mind becoming pure, making it possible to apprehend all things correctly.

Section 3.15: Change Starts from Prayer

Referring to the Daishonin's writings, President Ikeda discusses the profound significance of prayer in Nichiren Buddhism.

Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"The prayers offered by a practitioner of the Lotus Sutra will be answered just as an echo answers a sound, as a shadow follows a form, as the reflection of the moon appears in clear water, as a mirror collects dewdrops, as a magnet attracts iron, as amber attracts particles of dust, or as a clear mirror reflects the color of an object."

In this passage, the Daishonin states that the prayers of the votary of the Lotus Sutra are always answered. His use of natural principles and phenomena as analogies demonstrates his strong confidence in what he is saying.

Wherever practitioners of the Lotus Sutra chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, just as an echo answers a sound and a shadow follows a form, their prayers will unfailingly produce positive results there. The Daishonin teaches that our lives are transformed—both spiritually and physically—by prayer, which in turn exerts a positive influence on our environment.

Prayer is not something abstract. Many today may regard the intangible, unseen realm of life as nothing more than a product of the imagination. But if we were to view things only from a material perspective, then our relationships with people and things would largely appear to arise solely from the chaos of randomness. The penetrating insight of Buddhism, however, discerns the Law of life in the depths of chaos and apprehends it as the force that supports and activates all phenomena from within.

The Daishonin writes: "As life does not go beyond the moment, the Buddha expounded the blessings that come from a single moment of rejoicing on hearing the Lotus Sutra." Because "life does not go beyond the moment," as he says, our focus should be on the power that emerges from within us at each moment to support us and give fundamental direction to our lives. Prayer—namely, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—is the only way for us to confront on this fundamental level the delusions inherent in life.

It thus follows that prayer is the driving force for maintaining a correct practice and tenacious action. Nothing is as insubstantial as action without prayer. For those who neglect prayer, things may appear to go quite smoothly for a while. They may even seem very upbeat. But once faced with adversity, they tend to fall into despair, their lives as fragile as a withered tree. Lacking self-mastery, they are tossed about like leaves on the turbulent waters of society.

The path up the hill of life doesn't follow a straight line. There are successes and mistakes. Sometimes we win and sometimes we lose. With each step on our way, with every curve and corner we navigate, we grow a little bit more. In this process, prayer functions as a powerful force preventing us from becoming arrogant in victory or devastated by defeat.

That's why none are stronger than those who base themselves on prayer. Our strong, focused prayer manifests as the power of faith and practice, which in turn activates the power of the Buddha and the Law. The main player in this drama is always the human being—it is we ourselves.

Prayer produces a change within our hearts, within the depths of our lives. This profound, intangible inner change does not end with us alone but inspires a similar change in others. Likewise, when one community changes, it will not be limited to that community alone. Just as a single wave gives rise to countless others, change in one community will create a ripple effect of change in other communities as well.

I wish to assert that the first step toward such social change is a change in the heart of a single individual.

This is also, I believe, where the deep significance of the Daishonin's statement that "Buddhism is reason" lies.

To return to the passage from "On Prayer" that we are studying, "sound," "form," and "clear water" correspond to our attitude in prayer, while "echo," "shadow," and "reflection of the moon" correspond to the natural way in which prayers are answered. Just as these three analogies refer to phenomena that arise in accord with natural principles, the prayers of a practitioner of the Lotus Sutra will also be definitely answered in accord with the inexorable Law of life and in accord with reason.

Prayer in Nichiren Buddhism is free of all arrogance and conceit. The very act of sitting before the Gohonzon and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo pulses with the humble spirit to transcend attachment to one's own shallow wisdom and limited experience to become one with the Law of life and the fundamental rhythm of nature and the universe, which were revealed through the Buddha's enlightened wisdom. Without being self-abasing, we concentrate all our actions into a single life moment—into our determined prayer—while recharging our lives to prepare for boundless, vibrant growth. That is the healthiest and most fulfilling state of life.

Let us chant to the Gohonzon about all of our problems in life and challenge them.

Prayer is essential. Let's never forget that everything starts from prayer. If we lose sight of prayer and fail to transform our lives in actuality, then even the most eloquent speeches and high-minded arguments will all be just empty theory, pipe dreams, and illusions. Faith and the Soka Gakkai spirit, too, arise from praying strongly and deeply about our actual situations and realities.

In the Daishonin's Buddhism, prayer by itself isn't enough. Just as an arrow flying toward its target contains the full power and strength of the archer who shot it, our prayer contains all of our efforts and actions. Prayer without action is just wishful thinking, and action without prayer will be unproductive.

I therefore would like to point out that lofty prayer arises from a lofty sense of responsibility. Serious prayer will not arise from an irresponsible or careless attitude toward work, daily living, and life itself. Those who take responsibility for every part of their lives and give their all in every endeavor will make a habit of prayer.

This selection is from a lecture on Nichiren Daishonin's writing "On Prayer," published in the Seikyo Shimbun, October 22, 1977.

Note: Regarding the phrase "as a mirror collects dewdrops," vapor condenses on a mirror placed outside at night. It was said that the mirror drew this water down from the moon.

Section 3.16: Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Freely

President Ikeda responds to a question from an Italian member about whether quantity or quality is more important in chanting daimoku.

A 100,000-lira note is worth more than a 10,000-lira note. It goes without saying that it is preferable to have the note with the greater value. In the case of daimoku, the important thing is to chant earnestly and with strong conviction. Of course, it would be even better to have lots of 100,000-lira notes! The bottom line is that both quality and quantity matter in chanting.

The principle of "responsive communion" is very important in Nichiren Buddhism. To use an analogy, when talking on the phone, if the connection is good, we'll be heard even if we speak softly, but if it's bad, then sometimes the other person won't be able to hear us even if we shout. In order for our prayers to be effective, we need to express them honestly and directly to the Gohonzon.

The Daishonin states: "What is called faith is nothing unusual." In other words, we can just be ourselves. He continues:

"Faith means putting one's trust in the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni, Many Treasures, the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions, and the heavenly gods and benevolent deities, and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as a woman cherishes her husband, as a man lays down his life for his wife, as parents refuse to abandon their children, or as a child refuses to leave its mother."

We should be honest and unpretentious when we chant to the Gohonzon. If we are suffering or feeling sad, then we should take that suffering to the Gohonzon without hiding it, expressing in our prayers what is in our hearts.

It is the Daishonin's wish that we all become happy. By coming in contact with and connecting with the life of the Daishonin by chanting to the Gohonzon, therefore, we are certain to attain happiness. It is inconceivable that the Daishonin would fail to protect those who are striving as his emissaries to realize kosen-rufu.

Essentially, we practice the Daishonin's Buddhism for our own happiness and well-being. In chanting daimoku, too, the main thing is that we ourselves feel happy and satisfied. It's not a matter of formality; there are no rules specifying how long we have to chant and so on. While it is often helpful to set ourselves a target for the amount of daimoku we want to chant, when we're too tired or sleepy, or we find ourselves dozing off in front of the Gohonzon and just chanting out of force of habit, then it is far more valuable to get some rest and chant properly another time, when we're refreshed in body and mind.

The most important thing is that we are filled with a satisfying sense of revitalization after chanting. When we continue chanting in this way each day, we will naturally come to experience a life in which all our desires are fulfilled.

This selection is from a question-and-answer session during a North Italy representative leaders meeting, Italy, July 3, 1992.

Section 3.18: Developing a Strong Inner Core

President Ikeda responds to the concern of a Future Division member who was failing to make any headway in solving a difficult problem even after having decided to challenge it by earnestly doing gongyo every day.

In Nichiren Buddhism, it is said that no prayer goes unanswered. But this is very different from having every wish instantly gratified as if by magic. If you chant to win the lottery tomorrow, or score 100 percent on a test tomorrow without having studied, the odds are small that it will happen. Nonetheless, viewed from a deeper, longer-term perspective, all your prayers serve to propel you in the direction of happiness.

Sometimes our immediate prayers are realized, and sometimes they aren't. When we look back later, however, we can say with absolute conviction that everything turned out for the best.

Buddhism accords with reason. Our faith is manifested in our daily lives, in our actual circumstances. Our prayers cannot be answered if we fail to make efforts to realize them.

Furthermore, it takes a great deal of time and effort to overcome sufferings of a karmic nature, whose roots lie deep in causes we made in the past. There is a big difference, for example, in the time it takes for a scratch to heal and that required to recover from a serious internal disease. Some illnesses can be treated with medication, while others require surgery. The same applies to changing our karma through faith and practice.

In addition, each person's level of faith and individual karma differ. By chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, however, we can bring forth a powerful sense of hope and move our lives in a positive, beneficial direction without fail.

It's unrealistic to think we can achieve anything of substance overnight. If we were to have every prayer answered instantly, it would lead to our ruin. We'd grow lazy and complacent.

You may have a passing interest in painting, for example. But if you think you can simply dash off some paintings, suddenly hold an exhibition and have your work snapped up by art collectors, you are hardly being realistic.

Suppose you spend all your money playing rather than working, and are now destitute. Do you think someone giving you a large sum of money would contribute to your happiness in the long term?

It would be like making superficial repairs to a crumbling building without addressing the root problem. To create something fine and solid, it would be better to build anew from the foundation up. The purpose of our Buddhist practice is to transform our lives on a fundamental level, not superficially. It enables us to develop a strong inner core and solidly accumulate indestructible good fortune.

There are two kinds of benefit that derive from faith in the Gohonzon: conspicuous and inconspicuous. Conspicuous benefit is the obvious, visible benefit of being protected or being quickly able to surmount a problem when it arises—be it an illness or a conflict in personal relationships.

Inconspicuous benefit, on the other hand, is less tangible. It is good fortune accumulated slowly but steadily, like the growth of a tree or the rising of the tide, which results in the forging of a rich and expansive state of life. We might not discern any change from day to day, but as the years pass, it will be clear that we've become happy, that we've grown as individuals. This is inconspicuous benefit.

When you chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, you will definitely gain the best result, regardless of whether that benefit is conspicuous or inconspicuous.

No matter what happens, the important thing is to continue chanting. If you do so, you'll become happy without fail. Even if things don't work out the way you hoped or imagined, when you look back later, you'll understand on a much more profound level that it was the best possible result. This is tremendous inconspicuous benefit.

Conspicuous benefit, for instance, might allow you to eat your fill today but leave you worrying about your next meal. As an example of inconspicuous benefit, on the other hand, you may have only a meager meal today, but you are moving steadily toward a life in which you will never have to worry about having enough to eat. The latter is a far more attractive prospect, I think, and is the essence of practicing Nichiren Buddhism.

This selection is from Discussions on Youth, published in Japanese in March 1999.

Section 3.19: Faith Is a Lifelong Pursuit

President Ikeda responds to the concern of a Future Division member who said she feels guilty when she misses gongyo.

As long as we have faith in the Gohonzon, we are not going to suffer punishment or negative consequences from missing gongyo, so please put your mind at ease. Nichiren Daishonin says that chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo even once is a source of limitless benefit. So imagine the immense benefit you will accumulate when you continue earnestly to do gongyo and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo morning and evening. It is something we do for our own sake; it is a right, not an obligation.

The Gohonzon will never demand that you chant to it. Having appreciation for being able to chant to the Gohonzon is the heart of faith. The more you exert yourselves in faith—in doing gongyo and chanting daimoku—the more you stand to gain.

Also, Nichiren Daishonin writes nothing about the specific amount of daimoku we should chant. It is entirely up to each individual's awareness. Faith is a lifelong pursuit, so there's no need to be unnecessarily nervous or anxious about how much you chant.

You don't have to put unnecessary pressure on yourselves. Buddhism exists to free people, not to restrain them. Chanting every day, even a little bit, is important. For instance, the food you eat each day turns into energy that fuels your bodies. Your studies, too, become a valuable asset when you make steady efforts on a daily basis.

Our lives are created from what we do and how we live every day. For that reason, we should strive to live each day so as to continually improve ourselves. The driving force for this is our morning and evening gongyo.

Exerting ourselves in the practice of gongyo each day amounts to what we might call a "spiritual workout." It purifies our lives, gets our "motors" running, and sets us on the right track. It gets our bodies and our minds moving and sets a good rhythm for the day.

It is important to have the spirit to sit down in front of the Gohonzon. The spirit to keep challenging yourself to pray before the Gohonzon every day, to chant daimoku, even if only little, is truly admirable.

This selection is from Discussions on Youth, published in Japanese in March 1999.

Section 3.20: The Universal Language of Buddhas and Bodhisattvas

President Ikeda responds to a question from a member about the effectiveness of reciting passages from the Lotus Sutra and chanting daimoku in a language one doesn't understand.

I would like to address the question of whether there is any value in reciting sutra passages and chanting daimoku without understanding their meaning.

Of course, it is better if you understand their meaning. That will strengthen your faith in the Mystic Law. But if you understand and yet fail to practice, it won't get you anywhere. Moreover, you cannot understand all of the profound significance of the Law through reason alone.

Birds and dogs, for example, have their own language, their own speech. People do not understand it, but other birds and dogs do. There are many comparable examples among humans as well—codes, abbreviations, or foreign languages that are comprehended by experts or native speakers but unintelligible to others. Married couples also sometimes have their own language that only they understand!

In the same way, the language of gongyo and daimoku reaches the Gohonzon and the realms of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions and three existences. We might call it the language of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas. That is why our voices reciting the sutra and chanting daimoku before the Gohonzon reach all Buddhas, bodhisattvas, and heavenly deities, whether we understand what we are saying or not. They hear it and say in response, "Excellent, excellent!" rejoicing and praising us. The entire universe envelops us in the light of happiness.

Nichiren Daishonin teaches that through reciting the sutra and chanting daimoku, we can reach an elevated state of life in which, while engaged in our daily activities, we freely traverse the cosmos. In "Reply to Sairen-bo," the Daishonin writes: "Those who are our disciples and lay supporters can view Eagle Peak in India and day and night will go to and from the Land of Eternally Tranquil Light that has existed for all time. What a truly inexpressible joy it is!"

When we chant before the Gohonzon, the door to our inner microcosm instantly opens to the macrocosm of the entire universe, and we savor a serene and boundless happiness, as if gazing out over the entire cosmos. We feel a deep fulfillment and joy along with a feeling of supreme confidence and self-mastery, as if we hold everything in the palm of our hands. The microcosm enfolded by the macrocosm reaches out to enfold the macrocosm in its own embrace.

The Daishonin writes in "Letter to Niike": "When nurtured by the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we are free to soar into the sky of the true aspect of all phenomena."

In "On Offerings for Deceased Ancestors," he also says: "Though he himself is like the wisteria vine, because he clings to the pine that is the Lotus Sutra, he is able to ascend the mountain of perfect enlightenment. Because he has the wings of the single vehicle, meaning the Mystic Law, to rely upon, he can soar into the sky of Tranquil Light, which is Buddhahood."

Just as we might climb the highest mountain peak to gaze down on the bright, clear scene of the world below, we can climb the mountain of perfect enlightenment, or supreme wisdom, the Daishonin says. We can attain a state of eternal bliss, experiencing moment after moment the infinite expanse and depth of life, as if soaring through the universe and savoring the sight of myriad beautiful stars, blazing comets, and glittering galaxies.

This selection is from a speech at an SGI-USA youth training session, U.S.A., February 20, 1990.
