Chapter 9: Creating a Brilliant Final Chapter in Life

Section 9.1: Enjoying a Rewarding and Fulfilling "Third Stage of Life"

None of us can avoid physical aging with the passage of time, but the members of the Soka family, practicing the Mystic Law, becoming more youthful and vibrant and accumulating more good fortune with each passing year, encourage one another and adorn their lives together with victory in human revolution.

Nichiren Daishonin encouraged a disciple with the words: "You will grow younger, and your good fortune will accumulate" (WND-1, 464).

Life is often divided into three periods—the first stage of study, the second stage of independence and work, and the third stage of the fulfillment and completion of our lives. Here President Ikeda offers guidance on enriching that third period of life.

Buddhism in general is focused on solving the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death. However, the essence of Nichiren Daishonin's Buddhism lies not in simply overcoming these four sufferings. In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin states: "The words 'four sides' [of the treasure tower] stand for birth, aging, sickness, and death. We use the aspects of birth, aging, sickness, and death to adorn the towers that are our bodies" (OTT, 90). Nichiren Buddhism thus teaches a deeper understanding of those four sufferings, observing that they can be transformed into treasures that add dignity and splendor to "the towers that are our bodies," to the treasure tower of our lives themselves.

There is a saying: "The foolish regard old age as winter; the wise regard it as a golden time." Everything depends upon our attitude, how we approach life. Do we look at old age as a period of decline ending in death, or a period in which we have the opportunity to attain our goals and bring our life to a rewarding and satisfying completion? Is old age a descending path leading to oblivion, or an ascending path taking us to new heights? The same period of old age, especially in terms of the richness and fulfillment one can experience during those years, will be dramatically different depending upon one's outlook.

Let's try to make the third stage of life a third stage of youth. Youth is not something that fades with age. Our attitude toward life is what makes us young. As long as we maintain a positive attitude and a spirit of challenge, we will continue to gain depth and richness and our lives will shine with the brilliance of gold or burnished silver.

I think we can say that one of the most important challenges of the third stage of life is how to live in a way that is true to ourselves until the very last and show this to those around us.

People's memories and recollections about a person who has passed away, the example of that individual's life, can be a great source of encouragement and strength to them.

What can we contribute, what can we leave as a legacy for others in our third stage of life? After all is stripped away—wealth, renown, social status—the only thing that remains after one's death is the example of how one has lived one's life as a human being.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "If one lights a fire [lantern] for others, one will brighten one's own way" (WND-2, 1060). In an aging society, this spirit of contributing to the welfare of others is very important. It ultimately means brightening our own way as well.

Nichiren Buddhism teaches that since we owe a debt of gratitude to all living beings, we should pray for all of them to attain Buddhahood (cf. WND-2, 637).

Valuing people; treasuring human relationships—these are vital requirements for creating a society where people can truly enjoy long and fulfilling lives.

What matters is how much we can improve the quality of our lives during our time here on Earth—however long it may be. There is a difference between simply living a long life and living a rich and rewarding life. For example, a life can be fulfilled and productive even if it is short by time's measure.

What matters is that we live each day without regret, moving forward in our work for kosen-rufu; that we continue to cherish in our hearts a shining purpose and reason for living, whatever our age. Living this way each day is the key to a life of profound satisfaction and fulfillment.

The memory of striving arduously in our Buddhist practice for both the happiness of ourselves and others and earnestly chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is eternal, enduring throughout the three existences of past, present, and future. It remains indelible in our lives, even if we should succumb to Alzheimer's disease. It is clearly recorded in the "diary of the heart."

Soka Gakkai activities are the greatest source of pride in life. When we chant and take action for the happiness of others, we, too, become happy. No way of life is more worthwhile.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Single-mindedly chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and urge others to do the same; that will remain as the only memory of your present life in this human world" (WND-1, 64).

We have nothing to worry about. The good fortune and benefit we accumulate through our Buddhist practice will never age. Even should we suffer from Alzheimer's, they will remain latent in the depths of our beings.

Fundamentally, society must learn to value and respect the elderly, even those who suffer from Alzheimer's or other forms of cognitive decline, as venerable seniors, as predecessors who have made important contributions to society. With the rapid graying of society, all of us will be called upon to care for the elderly in one form or another.

A graying society will have to revise its values, placing cooperation above competition, quality over efficiency, and spiritual richness over material richness. It will be a time when we ask not what others can do for us, but what we can do for others—a time for seeking ways to make a contribution, while striving to stay fit and healthy. That is the life of creating value.

The Greek philosopher Plato is said to have advised: "We should recall in the vigor of the young people around us our former youthful vigor and allow their energy to revive us."

At Soka Gakkai discussion meetings, which are attended by people of all ages, the elderly have a chance to absorb the energy of the young, while the young have the opportunity to learn from the experience and wisdom of the elderly.

Nothing is wasted in Buddhism. In that sense, it is a model for an aging society.

The key is to keep hope alive in our lives, to hold on to our ideals. It is to press ahead with our mission as long as we are alive.

The American poet Henry Wadsworth Longfellow wrote: "For age is opportunity no less than youth itself, though in another dress, and as the evening twilight fades away the sky is filled with stars, invisible by day."

Let us join together in making the final years of our lives as brilliant as a night sky filled with sparkling stars.

A life lived to the fullest to the very end is beautiful.

That's why it is crucial to maintain the spirit and lively activity of our youth throughout our lives. We mustn't use our age as an excuse to become inactive or withdraw from life.

Many of Shakyamuni's senior disciples grew self-satisfied and complacent as they aged. They felt they had attained a certain status and degree of enlightenment, and that this was enough. They had practiced a long time; Shakyamuni's enlightenment was marvelous, they thought, but they would never match it, so they contented themselves with the state they had attained.

Shakyamuni, however, said this was mistaken. When he made his prophecy in the Lotus Sutra that Shariputra, who represents the persons of the two vehicles—voice-hearers and cause-awakened ones—would become a Buddha in future ages, he declared that his disciples must apply themselves vigorously to their Buddhist practice all their lives. He sternly urged them to keep striving, for this was the only way to attain Buddhahood. The senior disciples awakened to their own complacence, renewed their efforts, and were filled with joy. With this, persons of the two vehicles, who were said to be unable to attain Buddhahood, were able to become Buddhas as well (cf. LSOC3, 86–89).

Note on terminology: Attainment of Buddhahood by persons of the two vehicles refers to how, in the first half of the Lotus Sutra, persons of the two vehicles—voice-hearers and cause-awakened ones—receive a prophecy from Shakyamuni Buddha that they will attain Buddhahood in future ages. This prophecy refutes the view of the provisional Mahayana teachings, which deny persons of the two vehicles the attainment of Buddhahood, for they seek only personal salvation and do not strive to save others. The Lotus Sutra says that they will practice the bodhisattva way and attain Buddhahood.

"Strengthen your faith day by day and month after month" (WND-1, 997)—these words of the Daishonin epitomize the spirit of the Lotus Sutra and the Soka Gakkai.

The American poet Samuel Ullman wrote in his well-known poem "Youth": "Youth is not a time of life; it is a state of mind. . . . Youth means a temperamental predominance of courage over timidity of the appetite, for adventure over the love of ease. This often exists in a man of sixty more than a boy of twenty. . . ."

Youth is not a matter of chronological age. As long as one has a burning passion for kosen-rufu, one can still be a youth at 90.

Faced with the inescapable realities of aging and death, how can people make their final chapter in life and in society a brilliant and active one, lived true to themselves? This will be the most important question for our rapidly graying society in the 21st century.

Nichiren Buddhism and the Soka Gakkai alone offer a genuine solution to this challenge. With that conviction, let us continue the grand journey of hope that is kosen-rufu, creating a triumphant history of lives lived to the fullest.

From Daisan no jinsei o kataru, or A Discussion on the Third Stage of Life—Aging in Contemporary Society, published in Japanese in October 1998.

Section 9.2: Striving to the End with a Spirit of Ceaseless Challenge

Exploring the profound Buddhist teaching of perpetual youth and eternal life, President Ikeda speaks of the golden value of old age.

The struggle against aging is really a struggle against the fear of facing new challenges. The aging process occurs more rapidly in those who start thinking that they've done enough, who lose the spirit to foster younger people, and who remain attached to the past. Those who keep challenging themselves to the end are the most admirable and youthful of all. Such people are ever young and true victors of life. Come to think of it, the German writer Johann Wolfgang von Goethe was over 80 years old when he completed his masterpiece Faust.

The Soka Gakkai's founding president, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, continued advancing and challenging himself until the final moments of his life. He was 57 when he encountered Nichiren Buddhism and 59 when he founded the Soka Kyoiku Gakkai (Value-Creating Education Society; forerunner of the Soka Gakkai). In his 70s, he was still energetically traveling by train all the way to Kyushu to offer personal guidance and share Buddhism with others. He was fond of using the expression, "We youth."

About a month before Mr. Makiguchi passed away, he wrote a postcard from his prison cell saying: "I am avidly reading the philosophy of Kant." Such passionate seeking spirit and thirst for knowledge are no doubt the source of youthfulness.

The Buddhist teaching of perpetual youth and eternal life does not mean, of course, that we never age or die. It refers to our state of life, our life force. The Lotus Sutra states: "If a person who has an illness is able to hear this sutra, then his illness will be wiped out and he will know neither aging nor death" (LSOC23, 330). And the Daishonin writes: "If we consider the power of the Lotus Sutra, we will find perpetual youth and eternal life before our eyes" (WND-1, 413).

In other words, we are promised that, if we believe in and uphold the Mystic Law, we will never be defeated by illness, we can forever advance through life with a youthful spirit regardless of our age, and we can establish an eternal and indestructible state of happiness. This is nothing extraordinary. The precious members of the Many Treasures Group, who are always vibrantly active, are perfect examples of this.

In a certain respect, it's only natural that we dislike growing old, for it makes us think of the inevitable reality of death. But each period of life has its own distinct and precious value.

What is the true significance of old age? It is not a time to look back with nostalgic longing on our youth. I believe it is the climax, the period of life that should be the most satisfying and fulfilling, the time when we shine with the brilliance and glory of a magnificent sunset. It's not a period of gloom and sadness. As the French writer Victor Hugo said: "There is an indefinable dawning in radiant old age."

I feel that society today, unfortunately, has averted its gaze from the fundamental reality of death and, in the process, has lost sight of the golden value of old age.

The Daishonin encourages us to "first of all learn about death, and then about other things" (WND-2, 759). We must not avert our gaze from death but face it head-on and come to terms with it. If we can do that, we will come to appreciate old age in its own right and its true value will surely start to shine.

From the Buddhist perspective of the eternity of life, death is just a departure into the next phase of life.

The Daishonin describes the Mystic Law as "the great lantern that illuminates the long night of the sufferings of birth and death" (WND-1, 1038). Those who embrace the eternal Mystic Law are not afraid of death. They are not worried or troubled by it. They are able to freely savor the journey of life, experiencing a state of mind in which both life and death are a joy.

Nichiren Buddhism teaches the fundamental means for transforming a life bound by the four sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death into a joyous life characterized by the four virtues of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity.

From Sho-ro-byo-shi to jinsei o kataru, or Discussions on Life and Death, published in Japanese in November 2006.

Section 9.3: The Secret to a Vigorous Old Age

In this selection, President Ikeda discusses the best approach to enjoying a vigorous old age.

What is the secret to longevity? Of course, individual differences must be taken into account, and there are many diverse opinions on this subject. But we of the Soka Gakkai would naturally agree that an important key to long life is our practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

Other than that, it is generally said that mental attitude has a vital influence on longevity. In that respect, I would like to share some attributes commonly listed as having a positive influence on longevity:

First, not worrying about things too much. In a Buddhist scripture, Shakyamuni states: "The past should not be followed after, the future not desired. What is past is got rid of and the future has not come. But whoever has vision now here, now there, of a present thing, knowing that it is immovable, unshakable, let him cultivate it. Swelter at the task this very day."

It is foolish to endlessly suffer and agonize over the past, or to needlessly fret and worry about the unknown future. Instead, we should concentrate on taking care of the things that we have to do today. What is important is that we live each day earnestly and conscientiously. This is the Buddha's message.

Those who live long lives are for the most part optimists. I hope that you will live each day joyfully and with genuine optimism.

Second, having a goal or aim. French President Charles de Gaulle once remarked that the end of hope is the beginning of death. Hope is life. To lose hope is to lose one's vital spirit.

To practice Nichiren Buddhism is to always live with hope. It means to take it upon oneself to create hope, actualize it, and continue to advance in ever higher spirits toward still greater hope. And faith is the driving force that enables us to do this.

Third, having a sense of humor and the ability to laugh. In Europe, there is an old saying: "A joyful heart is good medicine."

The German philosopher Immanuel Kant also noted that laughter has a positive effect on our health, functioning like a physician.

True humor is not flippant; it is an expression of an open, relaxed, and generous heart.

Let us live with "a joyful heart." To do that, we must win in life each day, continuously pressing forward with powerful life force.

Fourth, striving in some work or mission. The Nobel Peace Prize laureate Albert Schweitzer is reported to have said: "I have no intention of dying so long as I can do things. And if I do things, there is no need to die. So, I will live a long, long time."

He in fact lived to the age of 90.

We can presume that the source of vitality that allowed him to live so long was the conviction that he had a mission to fulfill, and that as long as he did, he could not and would not die.

In addition to the four points I have listed, there may be other factors contributing to longevity. However, these four points are all contained in the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism and can be cultivated through our Soka Gakkai activities.

The members of the Soka Gakkai are advancing with hope, joyful hearts, and a sense of mission toward the great objective of kosen-rufu. All of you who make your way together with the Soka Gakkai are naturally leading the most admirable and fulfilling of lives.

The Daishonin assures Nichigen-nyo, the wife of Shijo Kingo: "You will grow younger, and your good fortune will accumulate" (WND-1, 464).

I hope that you will all deeply experience the immense power of the Mystic Law.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, September 25, 1992.

Section 9.4: A Source of Hope and Inspiration for a Happy Aging Society

Soka Gakkai members are taking the lead in creating a happy aging society in which all can enjoy a wonderful old age.

Birth, aging, sickness, and death are fundamental issues of existence that no one can escape. As the population ages at an unprecedented rate in many countries, people are living longer than ever, and time spent in the so-called twilight years of life is increasing, posing numerous new challenges for individuals and society. We of the Soka family, especially our Many Treasures Group members, therefore, have an even greater mission to take up these issues and find new approaches and solutions.

No matter how much wealth or power one may possess, such things vanish like a fleeting dream in the face of the unrelenting reality of old age and death. What is crucial, then, is the philosophy one upholds and the life one has lived.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin states: "Passing through the round of births and deaths, one makes one's way on the land of the Dharma nature, or enlightenment, that is inherent within oneself" (OTT, 52). The Mystic Law is the eternal and indestructible law governing all things in the universe. As people who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo based on faith in the Mystic Law and are committed to realizing kosen-rufu, our lives, too, are eternal and indestructible, diamond-like and imperishable. I firmly believe that, as entities of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, our lives will continue advancing steadfastly and calmly "on the land of the Dharma nature, or enlightenment"—imbued with the four noble virtues of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity—throughout the cycle of birth and death. As such, we have nothing to fear.

In one of his letters, Nichiren Daishonin warmly encourages and praises the lay nun Toki (the wife of Toki Jonin), who devotedly nursed her over-90-year-old mother-in-law until the latter passed away peacefully. This sincere disciple also faced her own health problems, which had perhaps been caused in part by exhaustion from caring for her mother-in-law. Nevertheless, she refused to be defeated by illness. Encouraging her, the Daishonin writes: "There is nothing to lament when we consider that we will surely become Buddhas" (WND-1, 657).

There is no reason to lament and ask yourself why, after so many years of sincere and diligent practice of the Daishonin's Buddhism, you should have to fall ill, or a family member should require nursing care, or some other such situation. Your practice has enabled you to lessen your karmic retribution and makes it possible for you to change poison into medicine. When families practicing the Daishonin's Buddhism pull together to overcome such obstacles based on faith, they will be able to open the way to attaining Buddhahood in a profound and substantial manner.

Note on terminology: Lessening karmic retribution, which literally means "transforming the heavy and receiving it lightly," appears in the Nirvana Sutra. "Heavy" indicates negative karma accumulated over countless lifetimes in the past. As a benefit of protecting the correct teaching of Buddhism, we can experience relatively light karmic retribution in this lifetime, thereby expiating heavy karma that ordinarily would adversely affect us not only in this lifetime, but over many lifetimes to come.

Brimming with powerful conviction in faith and shining brightly as treasure towers, our Many Treasures Group members are making the final chapters of their lives truly joyful. Their examples are an unsurpassed source of hope and inspiration for the realization of a happy aging society where long life is genuinely celebrated.

My mentor, Josei Toda, declared: "Smile amid the raging winds and fight on until your final day!"

My wise friends of the Many Treasures Group, together let us always brim with hope and forge ever onward!

From an editorial titled "Wise Members of the Many Treasures Group, Forge Ever Onward!" published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, April 2014.

Section 9.5: Building an "Eternal Palace" in Our Lives

President Ikeda teaches the importance of our final years as an opportunity to employ all our accumulated experience to promote the happiness of others as well as continue to advance our own efforts to attain true mastery of life.

While residing at Mount Minobu, Nichiren Daishonin sent letters of encouragement to the elderly lay priest of Ko and his wife, the lay nun of Ko—disciples who lived on faraway Sado Island.

The Daishonin concluded one of his letters to the couple, writing: "No place is secure. Be convinced that Buddhahood is the final abode" (WND-1, 491). Where is our final abode, our sweet home, our safe haven? It is here. It is within us. The state of Buddhahood that we bring forth in our own lives is our eternal safe haven.

External circumstances do not determine our peace of mind. No matter how wonderful a home we may live in, if we are sad and lonely, we cannot be said to be at ease or leading a happy life. Even if our present circumstances are good, there is no guarantee that they will continue that way forever. Only the "palace" of peace and security that we build within our own life through our Buddhist practice is eternal.

The lay priest and lay nun of Ko practiced Buddhism alongside Abutsu-bo and his wife, the lay nun Sennichi, fellow residents of Sado Island. While warmly observing the two couples' friendship, the Daishonin offered them detailed encouragement so that they could work together in harmonious unity.

There is no doubt that the older one gets, the more one appreciates the good fortune of having supportive and encouraging friends. The members of the Soka Gakkai are extending a network of such treasured friendships throughout their communities and society at large.

Shakyamuni said: "For those who are always courteous and respectful of elders, four things increase: life, beauty, happiness, strength." This passage is from The Dhammapada: Sayings of the Buddha, translated by Thomas Cleary.

This certainly makes sense in terms of the law of cause and effect.

A society that respects the elderly is one that respects human life; and such a society will continue to flourish and thrive.

In one of his writings, the Daishonin quotes the Lotus Sutra passage: "We may use our long lives to save living beings" [LSOC17, 280] (GZ, 657). "Long life" in this context refers to the immeasurably long life span of the Buddha as presented in the "Life Span of the Thus Come One" (16th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The eternal state of Buddhahood wells up within the lives of those who practice the Lotus Sutra.

Also, based on the Buddhist principle of "prolonging our lives through faith," we can strengthen our life force and extend our lives. This principle is based on the passage in the "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra that reads: "We beg you to cure us and let us live out our lives!" (LSOC16, 269). This is in the section that explains the parable of the outstanding physician, who gives "good medicine" to his children who have "drunk poison" (that is, succumbed to delusion), and who implore him to cure their illness. Through taking this good medicine (that is, embracing faith in the wonderful Law of the Lotus Sutra), they are cured and able to enjoy many more years of life.

Moreover, bodhisattvas do not strive to live long solely for their own sake. They do so to serve others to the greatest possible extent, using their experience and their seamless blend of compassion and wisdom to do so. This is a subtle but crucial distinction.

In one of his writings, the Daishonin refers to the leader of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth—an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law—as "a venerable old man called Bodhisattva Superior Practices" (WND-1, 605). This passage has profound significance from the viewpoint of Buddhism, but what I want to note today is that the expression "old man" here is in no way negative or derogatory. It suggests a venerable majesty, bringing to mind a person possessing qualities indicating a true mastery of life—for instance, firm and unwavering faith; unceasing compassionate action; indomitable courage; superb communication skills; unflagging patience; ineffable nobility and dignity; and a vast, inexhaustible reservoir of wisdom for solving any problem.

We could say that this perfectly describes the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, who are spreading the principles of humanism in the midst of these troubled times.

From a speech at a nationwide representative leaders training course, Shizuoka, February 1, 1997.

Section 9.6: There Is No Retirement from Faith

Sharing an observation by John Kenneth Galbraith about the importance of living each day to the fullest, no matter how old you are, President Ikeda states that the fundamental means for staying in good health is our daily gongyo, daimoku, and Soka Gakkai activities.

Dr. John Kenneth Galbraith, world-renowned economist and professor emeritus of Harvard University, is 90 years old and continues to work at a steady pace. Even now he is writing a new book. We have been friends for 20 years. I have visited him at his home in Boston in 1993, and we met here in Tokyo in 1978 and 1990. He was kind enough to present a commentary when I delivered my second lecture at Harvard, titled "Mahayana Buddhism and Twenty-First-Century Civilization."

Something that Dr. Galbraith said during our meeting in Tokyo nine years ago made a very deep impression on me. "I will be 82 the week after next [on October 15]," he said, "but I regard each birthday as a fresh start. I believe the older we get, the more there is to learn." This is the philosophy of life of the ever-youthful Dr. Galbraith. He also offered the view that having firm goals or plans for the day when we get up in the morning is important in terms of staying alert and healthy.

We should wake up every morning ready to take on the world. In that regard, doing a vigorous morning gongyo and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which enables us to start the day fresh and energetic, is a wonderful way to maintain health and well-being.

Our practice of gongyo and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo represents a sublime ceremony in which we bring the microcosm of our lives into harmony with the fundamental rhythm of the macrocosm, the universe. We join our hands in prayer before the Gohonzon and do gongyo and chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Our voice reaches all Buddhas, bodhisattvas, and heavenly deities—the protective functions of the universe. Though we cannot see them, they gather round us to keep us safe from harm. We are in their midst. How awesome is the power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo! All of the protective functions become our allies. That is why we have the ability and mission to guide humanity to happiness.

Dr. Galbraith also remarked to me that the biggest mistake the elderly make is to retire from their work, for without having work to do, one ceases to exert physical and mental effort, adding that a decline in mental effort can have a particularly negative impact.

This applies all the more to the realm of faith: there is no retirement from faith. Our Soka Gakkai activities for kosen-rufu represent the greatest mental and spiritual effort. They strengthen our life force, and as such are a fundamental means for staying in good health.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, July 3, 1999.

Section 9.8: Making an Art of Life

Referring to the last period of the life of Florence Nightingale, the pioneer of modern nursing, President Ikeda calls on us to live out our lives with passion and commitment.

Florence Nightingale promised her graduates: "I would try to be learning every day to the last hour of my life. . . . When I could no longer learn by nursing others, I would learn by being nursed, by seeing nurses practise upon me."

And she was true to those words all her life.

At around age 40, when she founded the Nightingale Training School for Nurses, she suffered another serious decline in health. She was constantly afflicted with headaches, nausea, and asthma attacks. Speaking for extended periods exhausted her. Many were worried that she might die too young, and she in fact did face several life-threatening health crises. Still, she never stopped her activities. She dismissed her illnesses, saying: "I am so busy that I have no time to die."

Even though she couldn't move about freely, she could write. For that reason, she always kept a supply of pens and pencils by her bedside. She produced an enormous number of articles and statistical documents, as well as more than 12,000 letters. Though her doctor advised her to stop writing, this only spurred her on: "They say I must not write letters. Whereupon I do it all the more."

She also declared: "Had I lost the Report [i.e., not been able to complete it], what would the health I should have 'saved' have profited me?"

These words illustrate the firm conviction that ran through her entire life. Nightingale was fueled by the bright flame of a powerful inner purpose to which she gave herself unstintingly.

Eventually, Nightingale's sight began to fail, yet she declared: "No, no, a thousand times no. I am not growing apathetic."

In her early 80s, she went blind. Nevertheless, she did not despair. She kept going with the spirit that she still had ears to hear and a mouth to speak. She astonished her visitors by how well informed she was of current events.

The Buddhist scriptures teach us that even if we lose our hands, we have our feet; even if we lose our feet, we have our eyes; even if we lose our eyes, we have our voice; even if we lose our voice, we have our life. This teaching comes from the Sutra of Collected Birth Stories concerning the Practice of the Six Paramitas and Nagarjuna's Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom.

With that resolve, we must spread Buddhism as long as we live. This is the spirit of a true Buddhist.

Even when Shakyamuni Buddha was on his deathbed, he preached the Law to an ascetic who had come to see him; he converted the man and welcomed him as his last disciple in his lifetime. This story is found in the Maha Parinibbana Suttanta, the Pali Nirvana Sutra, in Dialogues of the Buddha, translated by T. W. and C. A. F. Rhys Davids.

My mentor, Josei Toda, used to say that whether one's life was happy or unhappy is not decided until one's final years. The last years of Nightingale's life were the most beautiful and rich of all. She described her final years as the best days of her life. No woman was as loved and esteemed as she was at that time. It was said that just hearing her name cheered people up, and many women proclaimed that they wanted to be like her. People came from all over Britain and the world for her guidance and advice. Royalty and political leaders vied to meet her, but she refused to see anyone who did not have an interest in nursing.

She valued young people, saying: "All the more I am eager to see successors."

She received hundreds of letters from young girls who wanted to be nurses, and she answered most of them. To the very end, she sought out and challenged things that needed doing, planting the seeds of the future: "To make an art of Life! . . . That is the finest art of all the Fine Arts."

And that is precisely how Nightingale lived hers.

On August 13, 1910, that "artful life" came quietly to a close. She was 90 years old, and it was in the year marking the 50th anniversary of her school's founding. In accord with her wishes, her funeral was simple.

Nightingale viewed death as the beginning of a fresh round of immense activity.

Nichiren Daishonin states: "Passing through the round of births and deaths, one makes one's way on the land of the Dharma nature, or enlightenment, that is inherent within oneself" (OTT, 52). Those who have faith in the Mystic Law advance with joy in both life and death on the great earth of their intrinsically enlightened nature—in other words, the earth of Buddhahood.

Life is eternal. That is why it is essential to forge an absolutely indestructible life state of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity in this existence. To do that, we need correct faith, and equally essential are sincere and just actions for the sake of others. Those who devote their lives to kosen-rufu can walk the path of eternal happiness savoring the highest of all joys.

From an essay series On Florence Nightingale—In Tribute to the Century of Women, published in Japanese in March 2002.
