Chapter 24: The Organization for Kosen-rufu

Section 24.1: Advancing with Good Friends Is All of Buddhist Practice

The Soka Gakkai conducts various activities to promote kosen-rufu, including discussion meetings, planning meetings, and Buddhist study sessions centering on local district and chapter organizations. All these activities are ultimately directed toward realizing happiness for self and others.

Why is the organization important? Why does the organization exist? This chapter, titled "The Organization for Kosen-rufu," features selections in which President Ikeda discusses the significance of the organization, its importance in terms of our practice, and the Soka Gakkai tradition of discussion meetings.

In the first excerpt, citing Shakyamuni's teaching on the importance of advancing with good friends, President Ikeda explains that Buddhist practice is striving to improve ourselves with our fellow practitioners through mutual support and inspiration - the key to growth for both ourselves and others.

One of Shakyamuni's disciples was called Ananda. Note on terminology: Ananda was one of Shakyamuni's 10 major disciples. He was a cousin of Shakyamuni and also the younger brother of Devadatta. For many years he accompanied Shakyamuni as his personal attendant and thus heard more of his teachings than any other disciple. He was known, therefore, as the foremost in hearing the Buddha's teachings. In addition, he is said to have possessed an excellent memory, which allowed him to play a central role in compiling Shakyamuni's teachings at the First Buddhist Council after the Buddha's passing.

One day, Ananda asked Shakyamuni: "It seems to me that by having good friends and advancing together with them, one has already halfway attained the Buddha way. Is this way of thinking correct?"

The suggestion that having good friends is half of Buddhist practice might seem exaggerated, and no doubt Ananda posed this question with some hesitation.

But Shakyamuni replied: "Ananda, this way of thinking is not correct. Having good friends and advancing together with them is not half the Buddha way but all the Buddha way."

Advancing and striving together with good friends is not half but all of Buddhist practice. We of the Soka Gakkai have fully embodied this message of Shakyamuni, this spirit of Buddhism.

Sometimes advancing together with others is frustrating and difficult. Acting alone, just as one pleases, is undoubtedly much easier. But that can lead to becoming self-centered, which prevents us from practicing Buddhism properly. Before we know it, we'll have strayed from the correct path. Ultimately, we'll find ourselves in a lonely, sad, and miserable state of life.

Mutual development and true Buddhist practice lie in joining together with many different kinds of individuals and sharing various challenges and efforts with them as we encourage one another to advance and grow.

This is the real way to develop ourselves as human beings, and it is also true freedom.

From a speech at a Chugoku Region youth peace general meeting, Tokyo, May 7, 1995.

Section 24.3: The Organization Exists for People's Happiness

President Ikeda explains to young people the importance of the Soka Gakkai organization in supporting our Buddhist practice.

The Soka Gakkai is an organization working to realize the great objective of kosen-rufu - in other words, the grand and lofty goal of achieving happiness and peace for all humanity based on the principles and philosophy of Nichiren Buddhism. This goal cannot be accomplished through the efforts of one person alone. Its realization becomes possible only when individuals active in various spheres of society unite and organize themselves into a cohesive force toward that end.

Nichiren Daishonin designated six senior priests, and Shakyamuni had his ten major disciples. These, too, may be regarded as organizations. Both the Daishonin and Shakyamuni formed a network, or an organization, through which they endeavored to spread Buddhism while promoting the growth of their followers and supporting them in their Buddhist practice.

The Soka Gakkai didn't appear first and then become filled with people. People began forming bonds with one another; their circle grew and gave rise organically to the Soka Gakkai organization. Therefore, the organization exists only and always for the sake of people; people don't exist for the organization. Please never forget this point.

I also hope that, throughout your lives, you will remain the staunchest friends and allies of those suffering or in distress. I hope you will cherish the Soka Gakkai, an organization of and for the people - that you will respect it, support it, and work for its development. This is my heartfelt request to all of you.

Our organization exists to mobilize the spirit of human goodness - people's desire to help and benefit others - and use it to create great value. You might say that the Soka Gakkai is a body or organism that took form and came to life specifically to bring together the basic goodness of people's hearts, to further develop that goodness and strengthen it. Without the organization, there would be no cohesion or order to our efforts.

An organization dedicated to good enhances people's capacity to work for good and promotes further growth and self-improvement. It does not hinder people's progress or lead them astray. It supports people's self-development, putting them on a sure course to happiness and personal growth. And it is for this purpose that our organization exists. In that respect, the organization is a means, while the end is for people to become happy.

The Soka Gakkai is a wondrous organization. There is without a doubt no other realm as pure, genuine, warm, and beautiful. Being young, you may be unaware of society's harsh and ugly side, and so you may not fully appreciate just how amazing this organization really is. But let me assure you, there is none other like it.

It is a great citadel of the people that has been built through many decades of tenacious effort by our sincere members, including many of your own mothers and fathers, while they endured ridicule and insult from arrogant individuals.

There are those who criticize and attack our organization, but can they teach us another way to achieve absolute happiness? No, they cannot. The Soka Gakkai is a gathering that was formed by people who recognized this truth, who encouraged one another to become happy, and who united together to help those who were suffering. This is a solemn fact. It is truly noble.

The Soka Gakkai organization is a crystallization of genuine democracy, handmade by the people, for the people. It is the only body carrying out the widespread propagation of Nichiren Buddhism, which places the highest value on the dignity of the human being. It is the sun of hope for all humanity. That is why President Toda declared that the Soka Gakkai organization was more precious to him than his own life. I feel exactly the same way.

Though you may dislike organizations, is remaining alone really freedom? Can you guarantee that you won't lose sight of yourself if you're on your own? That's hard to say. Genuine freedom does not mean living selfishly and doing just as you please; it is traveling the correct path in life.

The earth, for example, revolves around the sun. If it were to stray from its orbit even in the slightest, it would spell disaster. A spacecraft, if it follows the correct course, can traverse the vast cosmos and reach its destination. This is the meaning of true freedom.

Sports, too, have their own sets of rules. There are certain ways of doing things. Does freedom mean going around arbitrarily breaking these rules? I don't think so. Genuine freedom is making full use of your strength and skill while following the rules of the game.

To live without a goal or purpose, doing whatever you please, whenever you please, makes for a reckless and self-destructive life. Organizations are made up of many different kinds of people, which provides the stimulus for personal growth. In many sports, too, it's hard to assess your real ability if you train or practice only by yourself. You develop and grow through interacting with many others.

For instance, taros - potato-like vegetables popular in Japan and other places - are rough and dirty when harvested, but when placed in a basin of running water together and rolled against each other, the skin is peeled away, leaving them shiny clean and ready for cooking. It's probably inappropriate to compare people to taros, but my point is that the only way for you to hone and polish your character is through your interactions with others.

Being on your own without having to see or think about others may seem comfortable and worry free, but you'll find yourself stuck in a world that is terribly small and limited. By avoiding belonging to any group or organization, you deprive yourself of contact with many people, and in the end, you may well be left wondering about the meaning of your own existence.

A society without any organization whatsoever would be chaotic and disordered; there would be mob rule, with everyone just doing as they pleased, regardless of the consequences. It would be like a ship sailing out to sea without a compass - either it will lose its way or end up being wrecked.

The organization is a means, not an end; it is not perfect.

In the early years of my practice, I found it difficult to get used to the atmosphere of the Soka Gakkai organization. Back then, we lacked the element of culture, and I just couldn't bring myself to like the organization. Sensing this, Mr. Toda said to me: "If that's how you feel, then why don't you create an organization that you truly like? Work hard and devote yourself earnestly to building the ideal organization through your own effort!"

It's the same with school or your family. As a member of the organization that is school, you need to be committed to making it a better place. As a member of the organization that is your family, you need to have the spirit to create the best possible home environment. That only stands to reason, and Buddhism is based on reason. Taking personal responsibility for our lives with the spirit "I will be the driving force for change!" is the spirit of Nichiren Buddhism.

Our organization dedicated to kosen-rufu was created so that we could deepen our understanding of Nichiren Buddhism and also share its ideals and principles with others.

From Discussions on Youth, published in Japanese in March 1999.

Section 24.4: Expanding Our Life State

President Ikeda underscores the importance of polishing our lives through the mutual support and inspiration that come from engaging with many people.

How can we expand our life state? By expanding our human relationships.

Those who dislike being involved in the organization, who gradually close themselves off from others and prefer to be alone because they think that allows them more freedom, usually end up having difficulties of one sort or another.

Human relationships and interactions are important. We need to connect and associate with others, both within and outside the organization. Doing so expands and enriches our lives.

The great Indian thinker Rabindranath Tagore declared: "He [the human being] misses himself when isolated; he finds his own larger and truer self in his wide human relationship."

By isolating ourselves, we lose ourselves; it is within the broad range of human relationships that we discover our greater selves - Tagore's insight is in tune with the Buddhist view and the ideals of the Soka Gakkai.

Genuine leaders don't just speak in front of members at meetings or see their role only in terms of their organizational position. Rather, they are focused on their growth as human beings and on how, as human beings, they can help and support as many others as possible. Sincerely interacting with many people is what makes a true leader.

Withdrawing from human interaction leads to isolation, selfishness, narrow-mindedness, and self-absorption. Rejecting participation in the organization and interaction with others is a form of coldness, a lack of compassion, and a missed opportunity to improve ourselves in an atmosphere of mutual support and inspiration.

The German writer Johann Wolfgang von Goethe said: "It is a great folly to hope that [others] will harmonize with us. . . . For it is in conflict with natures opposed to [their] own that [human beings] must collect [their] strength to fight [their] way through; and thus all our different sides are brought out and developed, so that we soon feel ourselves a match for every foe."

We mustn't avoid those who don't seem to listen to us or who think differently from us. Part of our practice is learning to work harmoniously with such individuals and gain their understanding and support. This is how our movement as a whole advances and how we grow as individuals. We must strive to be able to engage with anyone without trepidation.

I have spoken with leaders of society around the world. The ability and strength to do so can be gained by actively forging relationships with others.

Those who strive to talk with even one more person are victors. Our victory is determined by how much energy we put into caring for and supporting others. Only by working together harmoniously with all kinds of people and inspiring them to move with us toward kosen-rufu, or world peace, can we ourselves be victorious.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, July 9, 1997.

Section 24.5: Creating a United Network of People Dedicated to Good

Both the first and second Soka Gakkai presidents, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi and Josei Toda, realized early on the importance of having an organization to advance kosen-rufu. Noting this, President Ikeda discusses the profound mission of the Soka Gakkai as a united network of people dedicated to good.

Tsunesaburo Makiguchi began practicing Nichiren Buddhism in 1928, when he was 57. Josei Toda, then a young man of 28, followed his lead and also began practicing that year - which, coincidentally, was the year I was born.

In his Soka kyoikugaku taikei (The System of Value-Creating Education), Mr. Makiguchi writes:

"If I had not taken faith in the Lotus Sutra, then like many of my well-meaning friends and acquaintances, not wishing to offend or upset others, I would doubtless have pretended not to see wrongdoing, refrained from saying what I really thought, and clung to the belief that losing the affection and regard of others would be personally disadvantageous. . . . But if everyone continues to subscribe to this apparent wisdom, what will happen to our nation and our society?"

Not making waves - avoiding confrontation and ignoring wrongdoing - when everyone adopts this attitude, behaving with self-serving expedience, what happens to society? It becomes dominated by corrupt people while good people are harassed and oppressed. As a Buddhist, this is unacceptable, Mr. Makiguchi maintained.

That's why he stood up resolutely to fight for good, to struggle against evil. He initiated this challenge because the true teaching of Buddhism is that we must not stand by and ignore what is wrong and unjust.

Corrupt people readily join forces, Mr. Makiguchi warned. Because they are aware of their own failings and weaknesses, he said, they are uneasy on their own. They are quick to rally together and particularly tend to seek protection under the wings of the powerful. They also easily band together against a common foe.

Mr. Makiguchi saw through this unchanging pattern by which corrupt people operate. His philosophy and insight are equally illuminating today. He was a truly extraordinary and unique individual.

But while the corrupt readily band together, the good do not. Why?

Mr. Makiguchi explains: "Because the good do not have such character flaws or weaknesses, they remain independent and do not readily form alliances to oppose corruption, which makes them an easy target for oppression."

Unlike the corrupt, the good are not weak or flawed, so they ordinarily remain self-reliant. As a result, Mr. Makiguchi says: "The more powerful the corrupt grow, the more they oppress the good - who, in contrast, remain isolated and collectively weak. As the former group multiplies, the latter is further diminished, making for a grim society."

Bad people join together and their influence becomes stronger and stronger. Good people remain disconnected and their power grows weaker and weaker. Society becomes brutal, dark, and threatening. Mr. Makiguchi's words describe all too well the state of present-day Japan and the world.

To defeat this alliance of evil, a clearly defined, active force for good must be established. This is why Mr. Makiguchi founded the Soka Kyoiku Gakkai (Value-Creating Education Society; forerunner of the Soka Gakkai) as an alliance of people who champion the cause of good.

Abstract principles and theories are not enough; we have to build a solid and enduring organization dedicated to justice and good so that people will actually unite together as a force for good - it was with this conviction that Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda established our organization.

When my mentor, Mr. Toda, was released from prison and stood up alone amid the devastation of postwar Japan, the first thing he did was to embark on rebuilding the Soka Gakkai. He exerted himself tirelessly to that end. That was the starting point of all his efforts.

Mr. Toda often declared that the Soka Gakkai organization was more precious than his own life.

Already as a young man, I also had an awareness of how important organizations were. The postwar period was a time when labor unions and various other groups were very active in society.

Soon after the war's end, before I began practicing Nichiren Buddhism, some of my friends and I would regularly gather to hold informal study sessions. On one occasion, we invited a university professor. He told us that while it was valuable to discuss ideas, from now on organizations would be the key to success. You can advocate the finest theories, he said, but those who form organizations will prevail. I have never forgotten his words.

It was a short time later that I encountered Mr. Toda and the organization of the Soka Gakkai. Mr. Toda was engaged in rebuilding the Soka Gakkai. I instinctively sensed that he was putting into practice what that professor had said, and that he was a remarkable person. With the keen eyes of youth, I discerned his greatness.

Today, the Soka Gakkai has become an unrivaled organization of the people. Inheriting Mr. Makiguchi's founding vision, we have forged a broad and strong network of wisdom and good around the world, one which we hope to spread even more widely.

No matter how negative forces may band together to assail us, the Soka Gakkai will remain undaunted.

I hope you will recognize that the Soka Gakkai's present development is due to the benefit gained from the selfless struggles that Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda waged at the risk of their lives against the devilish nature of authority.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, November 12, 1994.

Section 24.6: Discussion Meetings Are the Heart of the Soka Gakkai

President Ikeda explains that Soka Gakkai discussion meetings, where members from the same community come together to encourage and support one another, are microcosms of human harmony and the heartbeat of kosen-rufu.

Discussion meetings are a great river, of which all our other activities are tributaries.

Our activities to promote friendship and understanding, as well as the different kinds of meetings we hold, all merge into the great river of discussion meetings and flow toward the vast ocean of an age of the people. Along both banks of that great river are vast, fertile fields of humanistic culture producing rich and abundant fruit.

Discussion meetings are the heart of the Soka Gakkai. Mr. Toda often told us: "Mr. Makiguchi always made sure he got to the meeting place before anyone else. When the first person arrived, he would engage them in an earnest discussion. When a second and third person arrived, he included them in the conversation, sharing Buddhism with great personal warmth and care."

Mr. Toda also said: "If only one person shows up for a meeting, that's fine. Devote all your energy to explaining Nichiren Buddhism to that person, sharing experiences of your Buddhist practice, and talking sincerely about kosen-rufu and life. If two people show up, so much the better. Speak to them about the Gohonzon and make the meeting an inspiring occasion for them. If three show up, consider that a large number!"

Heart-to-heart discussion is always more effective than ordering people around. And because dialogue takes place between individuals, it requires that we respect and value the other person. This sets the stage for lively and enriching discussion meetings.

In the Soka Gakkai, when we speak of "the tradition of discussion meetings," we're not referring to our history of holding discussion meetings for many years. Rather, we're talking about the Soka Gakkai tradition of valuing each individual, which is epitomized in our discussion meetings.

The Soka Gakkai has always been committed to encouraging the honest, hardworking ordinary people of the world. That's the very heart of our discussion meetings. In the eyes of society, our discussion meetings may seem very simple, modest gatherings, involving a small number of individuals and not particularly noteworthy. But these meetings are based on a profound philosophy that teaches the Law pervading the entire universe. They have a warmth that embraces everyone. They brim with irrepressible hope that can inspire even those overwhelmed by painful karma to get back on their feet again. They are joyful, inspiring, and often deeply moving. Soka Gakkai discussion meetings are oases where ordinary people gather; they reverberate with a spirit of fresh resolve and gratitude, where suffering is transformed into courage, and exhaustion into a satisfying sense of fulfillment.

These small gatherings are microcosms of human harmony. They are democracy in action. They are the heartbeat of kosen-rufu, linking faith, families, and local communities. They are filled with the sincere spirit - the spirit of the Lotus Sutra - to help all our precious fellow members and friends become happy.

The Lotus Sutra, the ultimate teaching of Shakyamuni Buddha, is itself a discussion meeting on a grand scale. It is a gathering of people earnestly seeking the meaning and purpose of life. Shakyamuni replies to their questions with utter sincerity, relating his personal experiences and employing similes and parables. Those observing and listening to this dialogue find themselves experiencing the great joy of expanding their own state of life. A radiant determination illuminates the assembly, a spiritual chain reaction occurs, and there is a sublime, heart-to-heart interaction.

Mr. Makiguchi called discussion meetings "discussion meetings offering experimental proof of a life of great good." By this, he meant demonstrating through actual examples in our lives, in a way convincing to all, the wonderful effect of putting our Buddhist faith based on the Mystic Law into practice in the real world, of a life of human revolution dedicated to the welfare of others and society. Soka Gakkai discussion meetings, from the very beginning, have been open and accessible to all. They are grassroots forums for infusing society with wisdom and vitality.

At meetings, we hear others' experiences of gaining benefit through practicing Nichiren Buddhism; we are inspired with fresh determination: "They fought and won; I can transform my karma, too. I'll do it!" We also applaud the efforts of those who are striving hard: "Let's follow their example and develop our lives like they have!"

This serves as encouragement toward attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime and inspires a sense of mission for kosen-rufu.

Mr. Makiguchi was arrested on July 6, 1943, in Shimoda, Izu, where he had gone to attend a discussion meeting. At the time, discussion meetings were held under the surveillance of the Special Higher Police - the so-called thought police. But Mr. Makiguchi remained unperturbed; he refused, even when repeatedly pressured, to accept the Shinto talisman mandated by the militarist authorities to unite the country in the war effort. In this sense, discussion meetings were a fierce battleground in the spiritual struggle against oppressive government authority.

Nichiren Daishonin's own struggle for religious reformation can also be seen as starting from gatherings for dialogue that were, in their way, discussion meetings.

The tradition behind discussion meetings is the noble fighting spirit that originates from the Daishonin and was carried on by both Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda. Every discussion meeting, brimming with that spirit and conducted with positive energy and joy, is tremendously significant.

Through discussion meetings, we are blazing a sure and steady trail through the uncharted wilderness of our times toward happiness for all humanity. Through our great discussion meeting movement, let us vibrantly spread the strength and optimism to win in life to our friends and others around us.

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, volume 2, published in Japanese in November 1996.

Section 24.7: Kosen-rufu Starts from Discussion Meetings

President Ikeda stresses that the correct practice of Nichiren Buddhism is found in Soka Gakkai discussion meetings, which are characterized by dialogue, hope, and encouragement.

Jutta Unkart-Seifert, former undersecretary of Austria's Federal Ministry of Education, the Arts and Sport, spent time speaking with small groups of Soka Gakkai members in various places throughout Japan. Her conclusion after those encounters was that the secret to the Soka Gakkai's growth and development is the openness and equality that exist within our organization. I couldn't agree more.

Soka Gakkai discussion meetings brim with dialogue, openness, equality, philosophy, and hope.

I always feel a rising excitement in my heart when the week for discussion meetings comes around each month. I envision the warm light glowing in the windows of meeting places throughout Japan. I hear the members' happy voices singing Soka Gakkai songs and their joyous laughter. I imagine the topics that are being discussed and the determinations everyone is conveying. I wish that I could sit inconspicuously in the back of each room, wholeheartedly applauding and cheering on every speaker. I love discussion meetings!

The Daishonin instructs in one of his writings: "Those resolved to seek the way should gather and listen to the contents of this letter" (WND-1, 206). In other words, discussion meetings - where fellow members gather to study the Daishonin's writings, support and encourage one another, and deepen their faith - embody the correct practice of Nichiren Buddhism.

A young man once told Mr. Makiguchi that he thought it would be better to hold large-scale lectures rather than discussion meetings. "No, it wouldn't," Mr. Makiguchi replied without hesitation. "Dialogue is the only way to communicate with another about life's problems. At a lecture, listeners inevitably feel uninvolved. Even the Daishonin's treatise 'On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land' was written in the form of a dialogue, you know."

Mr. Makiguchi traveled great distances to speak with even a single individual. He would conduct a discussion meeting for just one person. And his conviction did not falter even when he was imprisoned by the wartime militarist authorities. He challenged his interrogators: "Is there any difference between that which ensues from failing to do something good and that which ensues from doing something bad?" He refuted their mistaken beliefs through his logical and reasonable arguments about correct and erroneous Buddhist teachings.

In his inaugural speech on becoming second Soka Gakkai president in 1951, Mr. Toda declared that kosen-rufu begins with one-to-one, face-to-face dialogue.

In one of his writings, the Daishonin quotes the proverb: "One is the mother of ten thousand" (WND-1, 131). Aware of the importance of even one person, the founding Soka Gakkai presidents have acted with the resolve to share Nichiren Buddhism with every individual they encountered. This firm determination has led to the present development of our movement for kosen-rufu.

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, January 20, 2006.

Section 24.8: The Beautiful Realm of the Soka Family

President Ikeda says that the Soka Gakkai is a family linked together by the Mystic Law, a beautiful realm of harmony and camaraderie, filled with compassion, comfort, and encouragement.

I would like to confirm some basic points about our realm of Buddhist practice. We are a family linked by the Mystic Law. Our organization for kosen-rufu is a home that brings peace and contentment. I hope we will always be a gathering, illuminated by the Gohonzon, where everyone can feel secure, relaxed, happy, and energized.

When finally arriving back home after a hard day of work or studying, no one likes to be greeted with the angry rebuke: "You're late! Where have you been!" That will only make you want to avoid coming home altogether. Likewise, there are times when members can't help being late for meetings or are unable to attend at all. No one has the right to scold them for this.

A true home, a true family, warmly welcomes and praises its members when they finally return.

The point of sharing Nichiren Buddhism and participating in SGI activities is so the individual engaged in those efforts receives benefit and becomes happy. It's not for the sake of the organization or its leaders. Anyone who scolds or reprimands members who are doing their best is despising practitioners of the Lotus Sutra, which the Buddha deemed a grave offense.

We share the Mystic Law with others as part of our Buddhist practice because the Daishonin instructs us to do so. But whether the people we talk to about Buddhism decide to practice is fundamentally up to them, depending on their capacity to understand the teachings and other factors. The benefit we gain is the same, whether they begin practicing right away or just listen to what we say but don't immediately start. The fact that we spread the Mystic Law means that we are envoys of the Buddha and, as such, are worthy of supreme respect. We should praise and rejoice with one another, like brothers and sisters, for the efforts we make to sow the seed of Buddhahood. Through encountering this joyful family, many more people are certain to join us and seek to learn about the correct teaching of Nichiren Buddhism. Warm care and comfort are the defining characteristics of a home.

Our harsh society is filled with endless competition and stress. There are constant clashes of egos. But it is the role of leaders in our organization to ensure that when our members return to the "home" of the SGI, they can relax, smile, gain fresh inspiration, and recharge themselves so that they can set out into the world again the next day.

Some people have to work at night or at irregular hours. Others might be extra busy at certain times because of work demands or having to study for exams. They may not be able to attend meetings for a while, but with faith burning brightly in their hearts, they are valiantly rising to the challenges in their lives and striving to demonstrate actual proof of their Buddhist practice. As leaders, I hope you will put yourselves in their shoes and be understanding and supportive.

Let's make our meetings everywhere enjoyable, relaxing, interesting, and meaningful, filled with bright smiles and laughter.

The Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the universe are watching over these harmonious gatherings of children of the Buddha, the noblest assemblies in all the world.

In our Soka family, everyone is equal. Each member has their own role, but they are all children of the Buddha, with equal rights. Being a leader doesn't make one superior. Rather, the higher one's leadership position, the greater one's responsibility.

Nichiren Daishonin said with infinitely warm compassion to a mother and young daughter who both embraced his teaching: "If [the Mongol forces should invade Japan and] anything at all happens, please come over here [to Mount Minobu]. I will welcome you. [If worst comes to worst] let us die of starvation together among the mountains" (WND-1, 616).

We share everything, our sufferings and our joys. That's what makes us a family. As a result, our sufferings are more than halved and our joys more than doubled. Families are not held together by orders or commands, by authority or domination. They are held together by love, by harmony, by caring and consideration.

A single unhappy person in a family makes the entire family unhappy. That's why we need to chant sincerely and support one another, so that no one is unhappy, no one stops practicing, and everyone finds true joy and satisfaction together. These human ties will give rise to real unity. Organizations based on authority and control, forcing people to do things in a military-like fashion, are always weak in a crisis.

The aim of Buddhism is the happiness of the individual. It is the same with our organization for kosen-rufu. People do not exist for the sake of the organization; the organization exists to benefit people. The goal of our organization is to embrace each individual and support them in their advance toward happiness and attaining Buddhahood.

From a speech at an SGI-USA youth training session, USA, February 25, 1990.

Section 24.9: What Is "Soka Gakkai Buddha"?

Explaining the meaning of "Soka Gakkai Buddha," a concept articulated by Josei Toda, President Ikeda stresses the lofty mission of the Soka Gakkai, the harmonious community of practitioners directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin and striving to actualize kosen-rufu.

The Daishonin declares: "If Nichiren's compassion is truly great and encompassing, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo will spread for ten thousand years and more, for all eternity" (WND-1, 736). He calls on his disciples to spread throughout the world the eternal Mystic Law, which opens the way to enlightenment for all people into the infinite future of the Latter Day of the Law. Our great organization, the Soka Gakkai, appeared in this modern age, which is plagued by war and suffering, with a vow to fulfill this noble mission in accord with the Buddha's intent.

Mr. Toda once described this as an immense source of pride and honor for the Soka Gakkai, and shared with me his conviction that in the Buddhist scriptures of future times our organization was sure to be recorded as "Soka Gakkai Buddha." A thrill ran through me when he pronounced those words.

A Buddha named Awesome Sound King appears in "The Bodhisattva Never Disparaging" chapter of the Lotus Sutra. But this Buddha is not a single individual. After the first Awesome Sound King Buddha passed into extinction, he was followed by another Awesome Sound King Buddha, and "this process continued until twenty thousand million Buddhas had appeared one after the other, all bearing the same name" (LSOC20, 308).

In other words, according to the Lotus Sutra, "twenty thousand million Buddhas" all named Awesome Sound King strove continuously to lead living beings to enlightenment over an incredibly long period of time. Mr. Toda's brilliant interpretation was that this series of Buddhas of the same name could be seen as an organization or harmonious community of practitioners bearing the name Awesome Sound King Buddha.

An individual's life span is limited. However, when the fundamental spirit of striving for kosen-rufu is passed on from mentor to disciples through successive generations in an organized body of practitioners, that organization will exhibit the eternal life force of a Buddha working continuously to guide all living beings to enlightenment.

The Soka Gakkai shines with the great light of compassion, dispelling the darkness of people's suffering and imparting hope and courage. It speaks out with a lion's roar for truth and justice, intrepidly vanquishing falsehood and injustice. It has unshakable conviction in the power of faith to transform karma and create happiness for oneself and others. It is a harmonious gathering based on the spirit of "many in body, one in mind," an indestructible citadel of mentor and disciple capable of surmounting any onslaught of the three obstacles and four devils. Note on terminology: The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are the obstacle of earthly desires, the obstacle of karma, and the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are the hindrance of the five components, the hindrance of earthly desires, the hindrance of death, and the hindrance of the devil king.

There can be no doubt that the "heritage of faith for attaining Buddhahood" (cf. WND-1, 217) pulses in the lives of the mentors and disciples of Soka, flowing powerfully without interruption for all eternity.

That is why Mr. Toda declared that should the words of a Buddha of future times be recorded in scriptures like those of the past, it would be quite natural to find the Soka Gakkai - the harmonious community of practitioners directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin and striving to actualize kosen-rufu - appearing in its pages with the name Soka Gakkai Buddha. Such is the noble mission and unparalleled greatness of the Soka Gakkai.

In a letter to one of his disciples, the Daishonin writes to the effect: "Should you die, you must declare to Brahma and Shakra [the two main guardian deities of Buddhism] that you are a disciple of the priest Nichiren, the foremost votary [practitioner] of the Lotus Sutra in Japan" (cf. WND-1, 82).

As proud modern-day disciples of Nichiren Daishonin and as proud members of the Soka Gakkai united in the spirit of oneness of mentor and disciple, let us continue to strive for kosen-rufu to the very end of our lives, and indeed throughout all eternity. Let us take the lead with pride and confidence!

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, May 10, 2006.

Section 24.10: Ensuring That the Soka Gakkai Endures

In this selection from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) touches on the concept of Soka Gakkai Buddha and outlines three important requirements for ensuring the eternal development of the Soka Gakkai, which is dedicated to realizing the Buddha's intent.

Josei Toda once said: "In this Latter Day of the Law, the Soka Gakkai has spread the Mystic Law to so many people and helped them become happy that in the Buddhist scriptures of the future, the name of our organization is sure to be recorded as 'Soka Gakkai Buddha.'"

Soka Gakkai Buddha is a network of members dedicated to the mission of realizing the great vow for kosen-rufu, a gathering of Bodhisattvas of the Earth following in the footsteps of the first and second presidents, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi and Josei Toda, who were joined by the bonds of mentor and disciple. Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

What are the requirements for ensuring that Soka Gakkai Buddha lives on for all time?

The first requirement is that each member has a lifelong commitment to fulfilling the great vow for kosen-rufu. With a profound awareness that kosen-rufu is the fundamental purpose of life and empathizing with those who are suffering, each person must strive to put into practice the Daishonin's words: "Teach others to the best of your ability, even if it is only a single sentence or phrase" (WND-1, 386).

The second requirement is to persist in walking the great path of the oneness of mentor and disciple. Inheriting the spirit of the mentor, who exemplifies selfless dedication to propagating the Law, the disciples must thoroughly study the mentor's teachings and make them a guide for their actions and behavior. Each day, disciples should challenge themselves in their lives and in their efforts for kosen-rufu, always embracing and engaging in dialogue with the mentor in their hearts and reflecting on what the mentor would do in their place.

The third requirement is uniting in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind." Nichiren writes, "[Chanting] Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but one in mind . . . is the basis for the universal transmission of the ultimate Law of life and death" (WND-1, 217). The heritage of faith flows on vibrantly when members unite in purpose and demonstrate their full capacities for the sake of kosen-rufu.

Since the Soka Gakkai is the Soka Gakkai Buddha, it must continue to fulfill the great mission of kosen-rufu by creating an eternal flow of successors.

From The New Human Revolution, volume 30, "Great Mountain" chapter.
