Chapter 7: Happiness for Both Ourselves and Others

Section 7.1: "Joy" Means That Oneself and Others Together Experience Joy

Buddhism teaches that we should strive for the mutual happiness of ourselves and others, without sacrificing the interests of either. President Ikeda has consistently affirmed that happiness must be mutual and that we must not seek our happiness at the expense of others.

In this selection, referring to the writings of Nichiren Daishonin, President Ikeda explains how we should aim to live as Buddhists pursuing happiness for both ourselves and others based on compassion and wisdom.

Nichiren Daishonin declares: "'Joy' means that oneself and others together experience joy... Both oneself and others together will take joy in their possession of wisdom and compassion" (OTT, 146).

Both ourselves and others matter. Caring only about one's own happiness is selfish. Claiming to care only about the happiness of others is hypocritical. Real "joy" lies in both ourselves and others becoming happy together.

Second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda said: "Becoming happy yourself is no great challenge; it's quite simple. But the essence of Nichiren Buddhism lies in helping others become happy, too." This quote is from the Toda Josei zenshu, or Collected Writings of Josei Toda, volume 4.

The passage I just quoted from the Daishonin plainly states that true happiness means possessing both wisdom and compassion, in other words, the life state of Buddhahood. If one has wisdom but lacks compassion, one's life will be closed and constricted. Such wisdom, then, is not genuine. To have compassion but lack wisdom or behave in a foolish manner is to be of no help to anyone, including oneself. And compassion that is incapable of helping anyone cannot be said to be genuine.

Only faith in the Mystic Law encompasses both wisdom and compassion. The Daishonin clearly states: "Now, when Nichiren and his followers chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, they are expressing joy in the fact that they will inevitably become Buddhas eternally endowed with the three bodies" (OTT, 146). This in itself is "the greatest of all joys" (OTT, 212).

Note on terminology: The three bodies are the three kinds of body a Buddha may possess. They are the Dharma body, the reward body, and the manifested body. The Dharma body is the fundamental truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the compassionate actions the Buddha carries out to lead people to happiness.

Mr. Toda maintained that "individual happiness and social prosperity must go hand in hand." The individual happiness referred to here is not self-centered; rather, it means cultivating true humanity, developing into a person who possesses wisdom and compassion and helping others do the same.

The Lotus Sutra, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, has the power to actualize both individual happiness and social prosperity.

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, volume 5, published in Japanese in September 1999.

Section 7.2: The Bodhisattva Way Enables Us to Benefit Both Ourselves and Others

The bodhisattva way teaches that our happiness is inextricably linked with serving others.

There are countless people in the world whose hearts have been wounded in some way. We need to extend a healing hand to such individuals. Through such efforts, we in fact heal ourselves.

When beset by some misfortune, people tend to think that no one could possibly be as unhappy or unlucky as they are. They feel sorry for themselves and become blind to everything but their own situation. They wallow in their suffering, feeling dissatisfied and hopeless, which only saps their life force further.

At such times, what gives someone the strength to go on living? It seems to me that it is human bonds, the desire to live for the sake of others. As long as we are wrapped up in ourselves, there is no happiness. When we courageously take action for others, the wellspring of our own life is replenished.

When we look after and care for others, that is, help others draw forth their life force, our own life force increases. When we help people expand their state of life, our state of life also expands. That is the wonderful thing about the bodhisattva way. The practice for benefiting others is one and the same with the practice for benefiting ourselves.

To only speak of benefiting others leads to arrogance. It conveys a sense of self-righteousness, as if we are somehow doing others a favor by "saving" them. Only when we recognize that our efforts on others' behalf are also for our own sake will we be filled with humble appreciation for being able to develop our lives.

Our lives and the lives of others are ultimately inseparable. It is vital, therefore, that we follow the bodhisattva way.

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, volume 4, published in Japanese in December 1998.

Section 7.4: Treasuring the People Right in Front of Us

President Ikeda introduces a story by the great Russian writer Leo Tolstoy to address three crucial approaches to living wisely.

Tolstoy wrote many very accessible stories and folk tales. He composed them for ordinary people who lived off the land, and for the young boys and girls who would inherit the future.

Today, I would like to share with you one of those stories, titled "Three Questions."

The story concerns an emperor who, in directing the affairs of state, finds himself wondering about three questions.

The first question is, When is the best time to start a task? How do I know the right time for every action, so that I have no regrets?

The second question is, What kind of person do I need most? What kind of person should I pay attention to?

The third question is, What affairs or tasks are the most important?

The emperor very much wants to know the answers to these questions, because he is sure that if he has the answers, he will be able to succeed in everything he does. He makes it known throughout the land that he will richly reward anyone who can tell him the right answers to these questions. Many learned people come to see him, and they offer many answers. But the emperor is not convinced by any of them.

The learned are not necessarily wise.

I will leave out the details of the story, but in the end the emperor gains the true answers to his questions from a sage who lives among the people.

This wise man replies that the most important time is now, this very moment; the most important person is the one in front of you right now; and the most important task is doing good to others, caring about others' happiness.

This moment, this instant is important, not some unknown time in the future. Today, this very day, is what matters. We must put our entire beings into the present, for future victory is contained in this moment.

Likewise, we do not need to look for special people in some far-off place. People are not made important simply by virtue of their power, learning, fame, or riches. The most important people are those in our immediate environment right now. They are the people we must value. Wise individuals consider the unique characteristics of those around them and make it possible for them to bring out their full potential. This is also the way to win the trust and respect of everyone.

Whenever I travel abroad, I always endeavor to sincerely greet and connect with the very first people I meet after getting off the plane, and then do the same with all those I meet thereafter. This is how my efforts to foster friendship start.

It is not important whether you are unknown or unremarkable in the world's eyes. What matters is that you know you have done your best, in a way that is true to yourself, for the sake of others, for your friends, and for people in society at large. Those who can declare that with confidence are champions of the human spirit, champions of life.

From a speech at an Asian commemorative general meeting, Hong Kong, May 16, 1993.

Section 7.5: We Are Enriched by Helping Others

Buddhism is the way to happiness for both self and others, and to victory for all. Serving others as we pursue that aim enriches us as human beings and becomes a precious personal treasure.

While sowing the seeds of happiness in the life of one person after another may seem like a long, roundabout process, it is actually the most fundamental groundwork for changing our planet as a whole.

Although it takes a long time for a tree to grow from a tiny seed, when it does grow big and tall, it will bear abundant flowers and fruit, and people will find rest in its cool shade. Each of us must strive to become such a tall tree.

Nichiren Buddhism is the path for attaining happiness for ourselves and others. It advocates neither sacrificing others nor sacrificing ourselves. It may be noble to sacrifice oneself for others, but it is not something we can expect of everyone. If we did, it would lead to a very unnatural situation.

Our real aim is the happiness of both ourselves and others. We need a path that empowers everyone to be a victor in life. That means, while we strive for others' happiness, we do so with a deep sense of appreciation for them: "All of my struggles to help him have made me into a much better person. How wonderful!" "The efforts I made to support her have made me so much stronger. How grateful I am!" The fact is, the harder we strive for kosen-rufu, the greater the good fortune and wisdom we will acquire. Soka Gakkai activities benefit others and ourselves at the same time.

For example, you meet and talk with someone, you chant for someone's happiness, or you write a postcard or letter to someone. Perhaps someone you arranged to meet didn't show up, but you continue to stay in touch and meet with them again and again. These may seem like small things, and you may sometimes feel you're not getting anywhere. But when you look back later, you'll see that none of your efforts were wasted. You'll see that going to meet others and encouraging them has made you a stronger, bigger person. You'll discover that chanting for a friend's happiness has enriched your own life enormously. The more time passes, 10 years, 20 years on, the more you'll see that your every action has become a precious treasure for you.

And the day will come when those you have reached out to will show their appreciation. Someday they will happily tell others that you helped them stand up in faith or become the people they are today.

Your aim is to play that role in the lives of as many people as you can. There is no greater treasure in life than this.

From Discussions on Youth II, published in Japanese in September 2000.

Section 7.6: The Bodhisattva Practice of Respecting All People

In his dialogue with Brazilian Academy of Letters president and renowned journalist Austregesilo de Athayde, President Ikeda discusses the actions of the bodhisattva as taught in the Lotus Sutra and the significance of the bodhisattva way in Buddhism.

Our happiness does not exist apart from the happiness of others. The Buddhist's foundation for action is the spirit of compassion. Compassion has two aspects, relieving suffering and providing ease. It seeks to eliminate people's anxieties and fears and impart joy, reassurance, and hope.

As a Buddhist, and, indeed, as a human being, taking action for people's happiness is only natural. But sometimes the simplest things can be the most difficult. The essence of the teachings of Buddhism is simple: treasure each person. A Buddha is one who strives and works tirelessly for the happiness of every single individual.

In Buddhism, those whose actions are based on the spirit of benefiting others, or altruism, are called bodhisattvas. Numerous bodhisattvas appear in the Buddhist scriptures, for instance, Manjushri, Universal Worthy, Maitreya, Perceiver of the World's Sounds, and Medicine King, to name but a few. Each of these bodhisattvas uses their unique qualities to serve living beings, working to protect and save them from various forms of suffering and misfortune. For example, Manjushri does so with wisdom, Universal Worthy with learning, and Maitreya with compassion. Perceiver of the World's Sounds relieves the sufferings of living beings through his power to perceive what is taking place in the world. Medicine King, as his name indicates, cures illnesses with beneficial medicines.

Of all the many bodhisattvas, Nichiren Daishonin focuses on Bodhisattva Never Disparaging in the Lotus Sutra as a model for practice. As the bodhisattva's name indicates, he never disparages anyone, showing the highest respect for all.

In the Lotus Sutra, Bodhisattva Never Disparaging greets people respectfully, saying: "I have profound reverence for you, I would never dare treat you with disparagement or arrogance. Why? Because you will all practice the bodhisattva way and will then be able to attain buddhahood" (LSOC20, 308). This is a distillation of the Lotus Sutra's spirit of respect for the dignity of all human beings. As described in the sutra, Bodhisattva Never Disparaging presses his hands together in reverence and bows to all whom he meets.

Nichiren Daishonin identifies the actions of Bodhisattva Never Disparaging as the essence of the practice of Buddhism, writing: "The heart of the Buddha's lifetime of teachings is the Lotus Sutra, and the heart of the practice of the Lotus Sutra is found in the '[Bodhisattva] Never Disparaging' chapter" (WND-1, 851-52).

The behavior of Bodhisattva Never Disparaging is based on his conviction that all living beings are noble because they possess the Buddha nature. By revealing their Buddha nature, the universal nobility or dignity inherent within them, any and every individual can open the way to an unparalleled life. Advancing on this path together with others is the practice of the bodhisattva way.

From A Dialogue on Human Rights in the 21st Century, published in Japanese in February 1995.

Section 7.7: Accumulating Treasures of the Heart

The bodhisattva way constitutes what is most important in life and the supreme memory that we engrave in our lives.

By helping others become happy, we, too, become happy. This is also a tenet of psychology. How can those who have lost the will to live under the weight of inconsolable suffering or deep emotional wounds get back on their feet? All too often, the more they dwell on their problem, the more depressed and discouraged they become. But, by going to support and help someone else who is also suffering, they can regain the will to live. Taking action out of concern for others enables them to heal themselves.

There are many people in the world who feel that working for others' welfare is not worth the effort. Some even view the merest mention of charity and compassion with derision. Such arrogant disregard for others causes untold suffering in society.

An American missionary supposedly once asked Mahatma Gandhi: "What religion do you practice and what form do you think religion will take in India in the future?" Two sick people happened to be resting in the room. Pointing in their direction, Gandhi replied simply: "My religion is serving and working for the people. I am not preoccupied with the future." This story is from the book Ganji to Tagoru, or Gandhi and Tagore, by Tatsuo Morimoto.

For Gandhi, politics and government were also a matter of service and, as Rabindranath Tagore said, of helping "the most destitute."

It's all about action. In essence, altruistic bodhisattva practice is the very heart of religion, of Buddhism, and also of humane government and education.

We have a tremendous mission. The Daishonin writes: "More valuable than treasures in a storehouse are the treasures of the body, and the treasures of the heart are the most valuable of all" (WND-1, 851). To focus only on the "treasures of the storehouse," finances or the economy, will not improve the economic situation. Things may improve for a while, but this will ultimately not contribute to the welfare of society. It is people, it is the heart, that matters most. The heart determines everything. When we possess the "treasures of the heart," when our lives overflow with good fortune and wisdom, we will naturally be endowed with abundant "treasures of the body" and "treasures of the storehouse."

What is left at the end of our lives? It is our memories, the memories that we have engraved in our hearts and minds.

I met the Russian novelist Mikhail Sholokhov when I visited Moscow in 1974. He told me: "When one lives to an old age, the most painful experiences in life become difficult to recall. The older one grows, the colors of the events in one's life fade and everything from the happiest times to the saddest starts to pass away." After pausing for a moment, he continued with a smile: "When you turn 70, Mr. Ikeda, you will know that what I am saying is the truth." His words are profound, indeed.

Everything passes. Both the soaring joys and crushing sorrows fade away and seem but like a dream. However, the memory of having lived one's life to the fullest never disappears. The memories of having worked wholeheartedly for kosen-rufu, in particular, are eternal.

Surely all that remains and adorns our lives in the end is what we have done or contributed to the world in our lifetime in terms of how many people we have helped become happy, how many people appreciate us for having helped them change their lives for the better.

The Daishonin writes: "Single-mindedly chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and urge others to do the same; that will remain as the only memory of your present life in this human world" (WND-1, 64).

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, volume 5, published in Japanese in September 1999.

Section 7.8: The Supreme Path of Benefiting Others

In this selection, President Ikeda emphasizes that the supreme way to work for the happiness of others is to share with them the Mystic Law.

The reality of life is that people usually cannot even help themselves, much less make their own families happy. Many political leaders and celebrities pretend to be caring and altruistic, but how many are actually dedicating their lives to the welfare of others?

Our members in the early days of our movement were virtually all poor. Most had no particular social status or higher education. But they possessed a lofty spirit. They were determined to help everyone they encountered become happy. They burned with a sense of great mission as trailblazers for humanity.

There is no nobler way of life than to be committed to helping others, to empowering them to become happy.

I will never forget the words of one of the members who pioneered the movement for kosen-rufu in Peru: "Other than my blood and my bones, what sustained me in this life was just my wish for the happiness of the people of Peru." Those were his last words.

Mr. Toda said:

"You can give food to the hungry and money to those in need, but you cannot distribute those things equally to all who are wanting. There is a limit to material aid. And the recipients may be glad, but they may also become dependent upon you and think they can continue to receive this support without any effort on their part. The greatest offering one can make is the offering of Buddhism. This allows people to gain fresh life force, enabling them to do their work and to become healthy again. This inner strength, like water welling up from the earth, is limitless."

This is, indeed, the supreme path of benefiting others.

From Discussions on Youth II, published in Japanese in September 2000.
