Chapter 28: The Three Founding Presidents and the Path of Mentor and Disciple

Section 28.1: The Strength and Kindness of President Makiguchi

President Ikeda has repeatedly stressed that the mentor-disciple relationship in Nichiren Buddhism hinges completely on the disciple. And he has personally demonstrated a brilliant example of this as a disciple of second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda.

In his diary entry for January 7, 1951, a 23-year-old Daisaku Ikeda, then striving single-handedly to support Mr. Toda, whose businesses were in dire straits, wrote: "No matter what hardships may befall me, I will always count as my highest, greatest happiness the honor of having studied under this man [Josei Toda]."

This chapter features selections in which President Ikeda discusses the lofty mentor-disciple spirit shared by the first three Soka Gakkai presidents.

The first installment focuses on the life of founding president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi. In addition to being a geographer who authored Jinsei chirigaku (The Geography of Human Life), Mr. Makiguchi was a great educator who served as a principal at several elementary schools and published the work Soka kyoikugaku taikei (The System of Value-Creating Education). Though he never met the organization's founder, President Ikeda has worked tirelessly to let the world know of Mr. Makiguchi's noble life and achievements.

Josei Toda was an individual of incomparable strength and unbounded kindness. He had tremendous compassion for the poor and unfortunate. The person who most impressed Mr. Toda was Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, an individual who was also both strong and kind.

On snowy winter days as an elementary school teacher in Hokkaido, Mr. Makiguchi would go out to meet students making their way to school and walk some of them home when the school day was over. He would watch carefully to ensure the weaker children didn't fall behind the others, sometimes carrying a younger child on his back while leading older ones by the hand. In the mornings, he would prepare warm water to gently soak children's hands chapped by the cold. "How does that feel? Is that better now?" "Yes, but it stings a little!" What a beautiful, touching scene!

Later, after moving to Tokyo, Mr. Makiguchi became known as an outstanding school principal, but because he refused to curry favor with those in positions of power, they resented him. This led to him being persecuted and transferred from one post to another.

During this period, he was made the principal of a school [Mikasa Elementary School] attended entirely by children from poor families, many so poor that they couldn't afford umbrellas for their children to protect them from the rain. At his own expense, he provided food, such as bean rice cakes, for the students who couldn't bring lunches from home, even as he struggled to support his own family of eight. To avoid embarrassing those in need, he set the food out in the janitor's room, so the children could take it without drawing attention.

In his kindness, he was prepared to do anything to enable children to become happy. He wrote that he was nearly driven to madness by his wish to somehow rescue the children he witnessed suffering under an educational system that stressed rote learning and stifled individuality.

If the interests of his students were at stake, he would not hesitate to confront the educational authorities. He took action with righteous anger. In one instance, he boldly spoke out against the existing policy of sending school inspectors, who exercised uncontested authority, to observe classrooms with the aim of enforcing rigid uniformity in education.

His attitude and actions made him a target of the authorities' ire, while at the same time winning him the love and admiration of ordinary citizens. When he was forced to leave a school, his students cried, and even parents and teachers wiped tears from their eyes, testimony to just how well loved he was.

Ultimately, Mr. Makiguchi died in prison for resisting the demands of Japan's militarist government. Without a thought for his own life, he fervently rejected the militarism that brought such unhappiness to the people. He refused to accept the government's erroneous ideology.

True kindness remains strong in the face of injustice. Nichiren Buddhism teaches that anger can serve either good or evil. Anger for the sake of good is necessary. But just reacting angrily out of emotion is "the nature of beasts" (WND-1, 302). The greater the person, the greater their compassion. Great compassion is what makes them strong and kind.

From Discussions on Youth, published in Japanese in March 1999.

Section 28.2: "An Indescribable Joy"

Noting that Mr. Makiguchi began practicing Nichiren Buddhism at a relatively advanced age, President Ikeda states that we must never forget the founding president's spirit in dedicating his life to a lofty purpose.

Tsunesaburo Makiguchi began practicing Nichiren Buddhism at the age of 57, in 1928, the year I was born. He was by no means a young man. In terms of the average life expectancy at that time, he would have been considered elderly. In other words, he started practicing Nichiren Buddhism in the concluding chapter of his life, and yet he created an indelible record of achievement in the history of kosen-rufu. In his final years, he engaged in an unremitting struggle against Japan's militarist government and died a noble death in prison for his beliefs.

Describing how he felt when he embarked on the path of Buddhist practice, Mr. Makiguchi wrote: "When I made that great decision and finally committed myself to practicing Nichiren Buddhism, I came to fully comprehend and appreciate in my daily life the Daishonin's words 'When the skies are clear, the ground is illuminated. Similarly, when one knows the Lotus Sutra, one understands the meaning of all worldly affairs' (WND-1, 376). With an indescribable joy, I completely changed the way I had lived for almost 60 years."

Mr. Makiguchi uses the phrase "an indescribable joy." Through adopting the fundamental way of life of Nichiren Buddhism, he completely transformed how he had lived up until then, and found himself able to freely and energetically take action in society. His words convey to us his exuberance in feeling that nothing could compare to the joy of this experience.

This is none other than the benefit of practicing Nichiren Buddhism, and it is important that we continue to live with such joy day after day, just as a river flows unceasingly. And it is through deep, strong faith that we can elevate and expand the joy in our hearts. That is why Mr. Makiguchi taught that we must let nothing destroy our joy, that we must never let anyone or anything destroy our Buddhist faith and practice, the source of our joyful spirit and way of life.

Mr. Makiguchi continued: "The anxiety that came from searching in the dark for life's answers completely evaporated [once I started practicing Nichiren Buddhism], and my inborn reserve and diffidence disappeared. My goals in life became increasingly grander and loftier, and my fears dwindled."

So long as you live, do so with confidence and courage, dedicated to a grand purpose! This was the spirit of the Soka Gakkai's founder, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi.

I hope each of you will take his spirit deeply to heart and proudly live true to your mission while striving to realize our lofty shared goal.

From a speech at a Tokyo general meeting, Tokyo, August 24, 1989.

Section 28.3: The Soka Gakkai's Founding Spirit

Highlighting President Makiguchi's great love for humanity and his fellow Soka Gakkai members, President Ikeda asserts that the strength and beautiful spirit of the Soka Gakkai can be traced to these very qualities of its founder.

The mentor-disciple spirit uniting Presidents Makiguchi and Toda is the eternal starting point of the Soka Gakkai.

We celebrate the anniversary of the Soka Gakkai's founding today with unprecedented growth. All of this began with Mr. Makiguchi standing up resolutely in the most tumultuous of times, followed by Mr. Toda, who rose into action with a passionate, lionlike spirit. As the third president, I, too, have taken action with the mentor-disciple spirit.

Today's solid development and the enduring foundation we have built for the future are the product of the solemn path of mentor and disciple set forth by the first three presidents.

This path is the source of the Soka Gakkai spirit, the founding spirit of our organization. As Soka Gakkai members, genuine and courageous Bodhisattvas of the Earth, I hope you will awaken to the real significance of what it means to practice the way of mentor and disciple throughout your life.

Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

I never had the honor of meeting Mr. Makiguchi. Few of our members alive today have. Some of you may have an impression of him, from portraits and photographs, as an imposing or even intimidating figure. But everyone who actually knew Mr. Makiguchi fondly attests to his great warmth and compassion.

A famous episode that has been handed down relates how, one cold winter night, as a mother carrying a child on her back was preparing to return home after a discussion meeting, Mr. Makiguchi folded some newspapers and tucked them into the jacket in which the baby was wrapped, saying it would provide an extra layer against the cold. This anecdote presents a beautiful picture of his warm character.

Another person recalls Mr. Makiguchi's thoughtful consideration for others. Once, at a discussion meeting, when the woman who had opened her home for the occasion went to the kitchen to put the kettle on, he said to her kindly: "Don't worry about serving us tea. Please come and join in the discussion."

His example demonstrates care for fellow members and genuine humanity. These qualities could be called the Soka Gakkai's founding spirit and the heart of our organization. They are the source of the Soka Gakkai's strength, and of its beautiful spirit, one so rare in this world today. These are qualities that we must never, ever lose.

From a speech at a gongyo meeting commemorating the 57th anniversary of the Soka Gakkai's founding, Tokyo, November 18, 1987.

Section 28.4: The Soka Gakkai's Founding and the Mentor-Disciple Spirit

The publication date of volume one of Mr. Makiguchi's masterwork, Soka kyoikugaku taikei (The System of Value-Creating Education), is recognized as the day of the Soka Gakkai's founding, November 18, 1930. The spirit of mentor and disciple lies at the heart of this history.

November 18, 1930, the day celebrated as the founding of the Soka Gakkai, is the publication date of Tsunesaburo Makiguchi's Soka kyoikugaku taikei (The System of Value-Creating Education). The publication of this groundbreaking work was also the product of the shared struggle of mentor and disciple.

It was while he was the principal of Shirokane Elementary School in Shiba, Tokyo, that the name Value-Creating Education was chosen for his educational theory. This was during a period when the head of the Tokyo government's Education Department, the chief of school inspections, and others tried to orchestrate the removal of Makiguchi, who advocated educational reform and refused to tolerate injustice. Makiguchi had been seriously thinking of publishing the theory, which he had developed from his hands-on experience and reflections when he was a principal, as a guide and resource for future elementary school teachers.

One winter evening, Makiguchi and Toda talked late into the night, seated around the charcoal brazier at Toda's home. That was when Toda heard that his mentor wanted to leave a record of his educational theory.

In those days, most Japanese academics took an avid interest in Western scholarship. There was little likelihood that a book on educational theory by an unknown Japanese elementary school principal would sell, so it was quite obvious that no publisher would be willing to take it on.

Immediately after telling Toda that he wanted to publish his theory, Makiguchi admitted that the prospects were dim: "Of course, it is unreasonable to publish a book that won't sell and will only lose money."

Toda replied with conviction: "Sensei, I'll take care of it!"

"But it will be very costly."

"I don't care. I'm not wealthy, but I have 19,000 yen. I'll gladly invest it all."

At the time, an elementary school teacher's starting monthly salary was about 50 yen. Toda operated a private academy, the Jishu Gakkan, with the aim of putting his mentor's educational theory into practice. He was willing to invest everything he had in the world to ensure that his mentor's ideas would be published and shared with others.

Toda said: "I left Hokkaido without a penny in my pocket. I am who I am today because of my encounter with you. I don't care if I'm back to being penniless again."

Makiguchi looked intently at Toda and then nodded: "All right, if you're so determined, let's go ahead with it!" Makiguchi's eyes sparkled brightly. He added softly, as if to himself: "Well, then, what shall I call it?"

"What's the aim of your educational theory?" asked Toda.

"In short, to create value."

"Mmm, let me see. 'Ethic for Creating Value' and 'Educational Theory for Creating Value' both sound rather long-winded."

"Yes, they're not quite right, and something like 'Creative Education' doesn't quite capture it, either."

His cheeks flushed with excitement, Toda said: "Sensei, what if we take the first Chinese character of each of the words sozo (creation) and kachi (value) to make the word soka, and call it 'Value-Creating Education' (Soka kyoikugaku)?"

"Yes, that's a good name!"

"All right, let's settle on 'Value-Creating Education.'"

It was already past midnight. Through the dialogue of mentor and disciple, the term soka was used for the first time to express "value creation."

The biggest problem in publishing Makiguchi's theory was organizing the manuscript. It wasn't, in fact, a real manuscript; in the midst of his pressing duties as a principal, Makiguchi had mostly jotted down his thoughts on the backs of envelopes and advertisements, scraps of paper, and whatever else was at hand as the ideas came to him. The same ideas often appeared twice or even three times, and the existing material could never be published as a book unless it was carefully ordered and edited.

But there were no volunteers for this arduous job. Makiguchi had also wondered what to do about this problem.

Now, Toda said: "Sensei, leave it to me."

"I can't possibly let you do that, too. I know you're a mathematical genius, but compiling and editing a manuscript is an entirely different matter, and I'm afraid it will be too difficult."

Makiguchi turned down Toda's offer out of his wish not to burden him any further.

Toda replied: "Sensei, granted, I may not have great literary skills or be able to use complex academic language, but if the book ends up being too difficult for someone like me to understand, who will ever read it? Who are you publishing this for? To be read only by the world's leading scholars and academics? If you're willing to publish a book that even I'd understand, I'll gladly take on the task of compiling and editing it."

And so it was that Makiguchi accepted Toda's offer.

Cutting out the repetitive bits with scissors, Toda placed the scraps of paper on the floor of a small room in his home. They filled the space. When he could see them in their entirety like that, he detected a consistent approach and a brilliant theory.

Toda took on this laborious task out of his gratitude to Makiguchi.

On November 18, 1930, the first volume of The System of Value-Creating Education was published. The Soka Kyoiku Gakkai (Value-Creating Education Society; the forerunner of the Soka Gakkai) was listed as the publisher. In addition, Toda had the book title and Makiguchi's name printed on the cover in gold lettering, another sign of his sincere dedication as a disciple.

In his preface, Makiguchi expressed his appreciation for the young people who had helped with the editing and proofreading of the manuscript, and he cited the significant contributions of Josei Toda, in particular. Makiguchi noted that Toda became convinced of the validity of his ideas after experimenting with them at the Jishu Gakkan and thereby gaining positive results. He added that Toda played a major part in the completion and promotion of his educational theory. He also praised Toda's textbook Suirishiki shido sanjutsu (A Deductive Guide to Arithmetic) as a pioneering work truly embodying the ideas of value-creating education.

Likening himself and Toda to Nikolai Grundtvig, the founder of the folk high schools in Denmark, and his youthful disciple, Christen Kold, Makiguchi regarded Toda's existence as "a ray of light illuminating the still uncertain future of value-creating education."

From its very beginnings, then, the Soka Gakkai originated in the mentor-disciple relationship. That's why to keep the spirit of Soka vibrantly alive, the path of mentor and disciple must be communicated and perpetuated forever.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 23, "Bold Struggle" chapter.

Section 28.5: President Makiguchi's Lifelong Struggle

President Ikeda delves into the ultimate purpose and aim to which Tsunesaburo Makiguchi dedicated his life as both an educator and practitioner of Nichiren Buddhism.

What was Mr. Makiguchi's lifelong aim, his purpose? What did he strive to accomplish? To enlighten the people, to make them wise. He sought to help them cultivate their own wisdom so that they could use it to become happy.

At first, he advocated an educational revolution for that purpose, but he soon came to realize that what was fundamentally needed was a religious revolution. He tirelessly pursued and ultimately died for that cause.

Throughout his life, he wanted to change the timid submissiveness of the people, their readiness to yield meekly to authority. At the same time, he abhorred and denounced the self-interest of leaders who, far from helping the people become stronger and wiser, instead encouraged, exploited, and manipulated their timidity and ignorance. He was also a constant critic of abstract theories and arguments that were not grounded in real life.

In his Soka kyoikugaku taikei (The System of Value-Creating Education), President Makiguchi observed: "Most average non-academics conclude complex theories and arguments are too difficult to comprehend, so they unconditionally accept and follow the ideas of respected thinkers and scholars, believing this to be the safest route, and give up thinking for themselves."

He noted that the people had a long-ingrained tendency to leave things to others rather than think for themselves, and to quietly follow those in power. Society's leaders, for their part, take advantage of this submissiveness. They look down on the people and tell them to do as they are told, thus becoming ever more authoritarian.

The history of Japan until now has been characterized by leaders forcing the populace to follow them blindly, an authoritarianism based on keeping the people ignorant and dependent.

When life is not informed by learning, and when learning does not apply to living, then both become poorer as a result. This has been the cause of many problems in Japanese society. Mr. Makiguchi tried to change this state of affairs, insisting that it was hopelessly outdated.

He declared that the people are far more important than power, position, celebrity, or academic credentials. What matters, he argued, is learning the truth, creating value, and working for the people's happiness and well-being. This should be the aim of leaders and the purpose of all learning, of education, and of religion. Once we realize this, he said, should we not immediately set to work remedying the unfortunate situation that has prevailed until now?

Mr. Makiguchi's powerful message continues to offer keen insights for our world today.

From a speech at a divisional representatives conference, Tokyo, December 6, 1993.

Section 28.7: The Immortal Struggles of Presidents Makiguchi and Toda

The source of the Soka Gakkai's noble spirit can be traced to President Makiguchi's death in prison for his beliefs and President Toda's determination to vindicate his mentor, as well as his tireless efforts to realize kosen-rufu after his release from prison.

The heroic struggles waged by Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda in prison, standing firm against Japanese militarism, revealed them as individuals of towering character.

When the prosecutors interrogated him, Mr. Makiguchi remained dignified and resolute, as if he were there to teach them about Nichiren Buddhism. He boldly stated what no one else at the time dared to say. He spoke with confidence and directness, explaining his position with objective reasoning and moral principle. He made use of breaks in these harsh interrogation sessions to introduce his jailors to Nichiren Buddhism and explain his theory of value to the prosecutors. He spent his days citing and reading the Daishonin's writings.

He presents us with a model of unimpeachable integrity and unyielding faith. It is the greatest pride and honor of the Soka Gakkai to have such a great founder. And I am firmly convinced that Mr. Makiguchi's spirit of working tirelessly to spread the Mystic Law, while never compromising with any power or authority, lives on today as a firm tradition of the Soka Gakkai.

While in prison, Mr. Makiguchi remained calm and self-composed. In a letter to his family (dated January 17, 1944), he described his state of mind as follows: "Concentrating utterly on my faith is my work at this time. As long as I do that, I have nothing to worry about. Depending upon one's state of mind, one can be completely safe even in hell."

Mr. Makiguchi was kept in a solitary cell of less than five square meters [53 square feet]. A couple of hard tatami mats were laid on its wooden floor. Of course, there was no heat, and in winter, conditions were frigid, the cold piercing his body. Yet amid all this, and in spite of his age, he wrote that he had not the slightest worry or care.

We can see in him a hero, a champion of invincible, indestructible faith.

In his last letter to his family (dated October 13, 1944), he wrote: "I am avidly reading the philosophy of Kant. When I reflect on how I was able to produce my theory of value, a theory that scholars for the past one hundred years had sought in vain, and, moreover, to connect it to faith in the Lotus Sutra and enable several thousand people to realize actual proof, I am surprised in spite of myself. Therefore, it is only natural that the three obstacles and four devils should have assailed me; it is just as the sutra states."

Note on terminology: The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are (1) the obstacle of earthly desires, (2) the obstacle of karma, and (3) the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are (1) the hindrance of the five components, (2) the hindrance of earthly desires, (3) the hindrance of death, and (4) the hindrance of the devil king.

Today, kosen-rufu is advancing dynamically, on a scale exponentially greater than in Mr. Makiguchi's time. In light of the Daishonin's writings and the Lotus Sutra, it is a matter of course that we will encounter obstacles and devilish functions. It's foolish to complain about minor things that happen or to let them disturb our faith.

It is our mission to ensure that Mr. Makiguchi's perceptive faith and unshakable resolve, his passion and overflowing sense of justice, are passed on to future generations as the eternal Soka Gakkai spirit.

Confined in the same prison, Mr. Toda worried each day about the well-being of his elderly mentor. He once said of their earlier years together: "I supported Mr. Makiguchi with such devotion that when I didn't see him for three days, I felt like we had been apart for a year." Mr. Toda supported and worked alongside Mr. Makiguchi from the age of 21 until he was 45. We can only imagine, therefore, the grief, anger, and sorrow he must have felt when he learned of his mentor's death.

From the depths of indescribable despair, he stood up courageously as Mr. Makiguchi's sole true disciple.

He shared that, after learning that his mentor had died in prison, he vowed: "Just wait! I will prove to the world whether my mentor was right or wrong. If I were to adopt a pseudonym, I would call myself Count of Monte Cristo. In that spirit, I will achieve something great so that I might repay my mentor."

At the memorial marking the 10th anniversary of Mr. Makiguchi's death, held in November 1954, speaking of that pledge, he said: "I still have not done what I must for my mentor, but I am prepared to dedicate the rest of my life to proving the correctness of my mentor's actions."

These words are the impassioned vow of a disciple forever loyal to his mentor. And, true to his promise, Mr. Toda struggled tirelessly to vindicate Mr. Makiguchi, and he succeeded brilliantly in doing so. I regard this sincere spirit and practice as the true essence of the lofty mentor-disciple relationship. That is why I have taken Mr. Toda's lifetime aim as my own and dedicated myself wholeheartedly to its realization.

At the same ceremony, Mr. Toda said: "I regard the relationship I shared with Mr. Makiguchi as one of parent and child. By that, I mean that I am heir to his spiritual legacy. I have inherited that spiritual legacy and, at the same time, have been entrusted with a great mission, to make his theory of value known throughout the world. Having inherited his legacy, I have also been given a great task."

And he went on to dedicate his life to fulfilling his vow.

Mr. Toda also often spoke about the fundamental theoretical framework for a movement for peace, culture, and education based on Nichiren Buddhism.

We must never allow anything to destroy the Soka Gakkai, the spiritual citadel of kosen-rufu and noble legacy built and passed on to us by Mr. Makiguchi, who gave his life to protect it. We must make even greater efforts to strengthen and secure it.

From a speech at a Tokyo general meeting, Tokyo, August 24, 1989.

Section 28.8: Actualizing the Vision of the First and Second Presidents

This selection from The New Human Revolution describes the solemn occasion of the 17th memorial [16th anniversary] of President Makiguchi's death, held on November 18, 1960.

Shin'ichi had never met Mr. Makiguchi in person, but Josei Toda had thoroughly acquainted him with the founding president's life, ideas, philosophy, and convictions. A sharp image of this late mentor, whom he had never seen, was etched vividly in his mind.

Whenever Toda spoke of the time he was told of Makiguchi's death, his eyes would blaze and his voice would shake with rage. He once related the following story:

"Winter was approaching when Mr. Makiguchi died in prison on November 18, 1944, from malnutrition and frailty from enduring such harsh conditions at his advanced age.

"We never met again after our brief encounter at the Tokyo police headquarters in the previous autumn, before we were each placed in solitary confinement. Day in and day out, I prayed: 'Mr. Makiguchi is old. Please allow me to take all the blame for both of us, and let Mr. Makiguchi go home as soon as possible.'

"But Mr. Makiguchi died. Not until January 8 the following year, more than 50 days later, however, was I informed of this. I was being questioned by a preliminary examining judge when he said to me abruptly, 'Makiguchi's dead.' I felt as if my heart were being torn in two. When I returned to my solitary cell, I wept bitter, heartsick tears, clawing the concrete wall and beating my head against it in anguish.

"No one can deny that Mr. Makiguchi died with imperturbable dignity and composure, a martyr for his beliefs. Nevertheless, the fact remains that he was murdered! By the militarist government, by State Shinto, and by those cowardly individuals who bowed to the militarists out of self-preservation and self-protection. And for what crime, might I ask? He was murdered for upholding the freedom of belief.

"I later heard that Mr. Makiguchi's body was carried out of prison on the back of an employee of one of Mr. Makiguchi's relatives. Wartime made it impossible to arrange a car. Mrs. Makiguchi received her husband's body at their home with quiet grief. The number of people who attended his funeral could be counted on the fingers of one's hands. No doubt everyone stayed away because they feared the ever-watchful eyes of the public and the authorities.

"Mr. Makiguchi was an outstanding educator, scholar, and philosopher, as well as a great Buddhist who fought courageously for people's happiness. Japan repaid him by sending him to his death in prison!"

Josei Toda would end any account of Makiguchi's death with furious intensity, saying: "I will definitely avenge my mentor. This time I will not lose! I will achieve Mr. Makiguchi's dream of kosen-rufu without fail and create a society where peace will prevail eternally. I will prove Mr. Makiguchi's greatness to the world. Don't you agree, Shin'ichi, that this is the challenge of a disciple?"

Shin'ichi would never forget the way Toda had trembled with indignation as he spoke these words.

His anger toward the devilish nature of authority that had killed his mentor, and his fierce resolve to fight against it, never left him for a moment. Justice will perish if people fail to be angered by evil. Similarly, only a hypocritical kind of justice conducive to the perpetuation of evil will exist if people stop struggling actively against injustice and iniquity.

In November 1960, attending the 17th memorial [16th anniversary] of President Makiguchi's death, Shin'ichi Yamamoto's thoughts went to how Mr. Toda must have felt each time he attended such a service for his mentor.

After the incense burning and a speech by a member practicing since Makiguchi's day, Shin'ichi came to the microphone and began to speak in a quiet tone: "Were we to regard Mr. Toda as our father, then Mr. Makiguchi would be our grandfather. That would make us, Mr. Toda's disciples, second-generation disciples, grandchildren, so to speak. Though I, a second-generation disciple, never had the chance to meet Mr. Makiguchi, Mr. Toda constantly spoke to me of his mentor's lofty character and the noble spirit with which he stood up to fight for the welfare and happiness of society.

"After Mr. Makiguchi's death, Mr. Toda fully inherited his mentor's great spirit to spread the Law selflessly. He built today's Soka Gakkai, taking on one difficult struggle after another for his homeland, for the Law, and for people's happiness.

"Although I am still far too young and inexperienced, I have been appointed the third president to carry on the work of these two great men, our founder, Mr. Makiguchi, and my mentor, Mr. Toda. Nevertheless, I am filled with powerful resolve to live up to their expectations and, with utmost sincerity and devotion, simply do my very best.

"The towering spirit of the first president pulses strongly within the Soka Gakkai. Mr. Makiguchi once declared: 'Religious reform is not difficult.' And now, in fact, a religious revolution is unfolding before our very eyes and, just as Mr. Makiguchi stated, the flowers of kosen-rufu are beginning to blossom in profusion.

"Although I lack ability, I would like to make today's memorial service an opportunity to renew my commitment and determination to realize Mr. Makiguchi's ideals, and to take on any hardship or effort needed to do so."

It was a passionate vow.

Note: On July 6, 1943, Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda were arrested by the Japanese militarist authorities and charged with violating the notorious Peace Preservation Law and the crime of lese majesty. Their final face-to-face encounter took place as they passed one another briefly at the police headquarters on September 25, when Mr. Makiguchi was being transferred to the Tokyo Detention Center in Nishi-Sugamo, Toshima Ward.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 2, "Courageous Endeavor" chapter.

Section 28.9: Describing My Mentor, Josei Toda

President Ikeda enumerates the characteristics of his beloved mentor, Josei Toda.

My mentor in life, second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda, was a man of great character. I have received many letters from future division and student division members asking me what kind of person he was.

Earlier today, I jotted down my thoughts about my mentor as they came to me, and I would now like to share them with you in the hope that they might provide you with some insight into the kind of person Mr. Toda was.

He was strict. He was a caring mentor in life. He was astute and bold. He was broad-minded. He was passionate. He was intelligent. He was angered by injustice and arrogance. He was easily moved to tears. He clearly saw the essence of all things and events. He was a gifted mathematician. He was a man of rock-solid faith and conviction. He loyally protected and defended the Law. He had a character as stern as autumn frost. He always had a smile as warm as a spring breeze. He would smile and offer you a cup of sake. He had a regal bearing. He always had an air of excellence. He was at all times an ally of the people. He never forgot those struggling with the sufferings of life and death. He always shared people's problems and concerns. He was both an optimist and a pessimist. He fought for all he was worth against falsehood and evil. He was able to discern a person's essential nature and qualities. He was an expert at helping people give highest expression to their true potential. He spoke out courageously to realize the Daishonin's ideal of "establishing the correct teaching for the peace of the land." He wept for the poor. He was a man whose life, in one respect, was an unending series of bitter struggles. He delighted in others' happiness and joy. He hated, more than anything, being called a kind of guru. He was proud of being an ordinary person and a man of great faith. He always loved the people. He tried to understand the inner heart of each person. He was meticulous and on the ball. He was always bighearted and freewheeling. He was rigorous in instructing his disciples. He would give his life for his disciples. He was a man of immense passion. He always lived with genuine wisdom and intellect.

From a speech at a Tokyo Number 3 and Number 4 Areas general headquarters joint representatives conference, Tokyo, December 25, 1986.

Section 28.10: My First Encounter with President Toda

The following is a description of the solemn occasion when the 19-year-old Daisaku Ikeda, in search of a compass to guide his life in the desolate times following World War II, first met Josei Toda on August 14, 1947.

It was a quiet evening. Families had most likely finished their evening meals, and a stillness had settled over the area.

A small group of people were making their way quickly through the darkening streets to a certain house in Kojiya, in the Kamata area of Tokyo's Ota Ward, to attend a discussion meeting.

That was August 14, 1947, the fateful day that changed the course of my life forever. It was the day I gave my promise and pledge to Josei Toda to join the Soka Gakkai, which I did on August 24, 10 days later.

I was 19 when I attended that discussion meeting. Mr. Toda, my mentor, awaited me like a kindly father. Our encounter was a solemn, timeless moment in the eternal flow of past, present, and future. On that day, I vowed to become his disciple and dedicate my life to kosen-rufu.

The discussion meeting on that hot and humid summer night exactly two years after the end of World War II was a vibrant drama of ordinary people finding fresh hope in life. Outside, the unlit streets were pitch dark, and many parts of Kamata were still dotted with ghastly burnt-out tracts from the wartime bombings. The sufferings of ordinary, good-hearted citizens, many of whom had experienced the cruel loss of loved ones, were deep and persistent.

Young as I was, I asked myself rigorously day after day who was responsible for all this pain. I was in my teens and suffering from tuberculosis, which produced a fever that left me weak and aching every evening.

I was seeking some sort of guiding star, a compass that would lead me to a life of hope. Some friends told me that there was going to be a meeting about the philosophy of life, and so I went, unaware of what kind of gathering it actually was.

I think I arrived at the meeting place at about 8:00 p.m., when the streets were already dark. I removed my shoes at the entrance and heard a lively, slightly husky voice coming from the room inside. It was my first time to hear Mr. Toda speak. He was giving a lecture on the treatise "On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land." In that work, Nichiren Daishonin sets forth his great philosophy for building a peaceful society.

Later, I learned that Mr. Toda had recently started to hold monthly lectures on this treatise, in addition to a separate lecture series on the Lotus Sutra, which he had begun the previous year.

In the lecture at my first meeting, Mr. Toda poured all of his passion and resolve into awakening the world to the dangers it faced. It was a lion's roar proclaiming the essence of Nichiren Buddhism.

His lecture did not present an antiquated, lifeless Buddhism. It revealed a noble way to a brilliant future, a great path brimming with tremendous conviction and dynamism.

After the lecture, an informal discussion ensued. Chewing on mints, Mr. Toda conversed openly and naturally. There was no trace of the condescending, puffed-up arrogance so common among religious and political figures wrapped up in formalities. Though it was our first meeting, I felt free to ask whatever questions I had in my young heart.

"What is the correct way to live?" I inquired.

My voice may have conveyed an unusual intensity.

I was 13 years old when the war broke out [in 1941], and 17 when it ended. The most impressionable period of my life was spent under the dark and heavy clouds of war. In addition, I was afflicted with tuberculosis. The shadow of death seemed to follow me everywhere, war threatening from without and tuberculosis from within. Then, with Japan's defeat, all the beliefs about the nation and life I had held until then were completely shattered.

What was the true way to live? To what should I dedicate my life? These were the questions always on my mind.

Mr. Toda replied with conviction and clarity. He didn't engage in intellectual game playing or deception that shifted the focus from the subject.

Tired of the patronizing attitude so many adults had toward young people, I was moved by his sincerity. I despised the political leaders and intellectuals who had sung the praises of the war and then, after Japan's defeat, changed their tunes without compunction, suddenly becoming impassioned advocates for peace.

The fact that Mr. Toda had been persecuted by the Japanese militarist authorities and spent two years in prison for his beliefs was pivotal in my decision to embrace him as my mentor.

I wanted to become the kind of person who, if another war broke out, had the courage to resist, even if it meant going to jail. I wanted to live my life as a person of courage who would not bow to any kind of oppression by the authorities. That was why I was seeking a practical philosophy that would help me do that.

I was just an ordinary young man searching for a path in life. I am certain that my wholehearted devotion to the path of mentor and disciple has enabled me to lead an unsurpassed life dedicated to the highest good.

In a lecture at Columbia University's Teachers College [in June 1996], I expressed the deep gratitude I owe to Mr. Toda, declaring: "Ninety-eight percent of what I am today I learned from him."

The relationship of mentor and disciple is one unique to human beings. By following the path of mentor and disciple, we can develop and improve ourselves. It holds the key to realizing our fullest human potential.

For as long as I can, I wish to pass on to my youthful successors everything I have to teach them. I wish to entrust the future to them. I hope that you, as my disciples, deeply understand my spirit and intent.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, August 14, 2002.

Section 28.12: Opening the Way for Mr. Toda's Presidency

When President Toda's businesses were in serious trouble and he stepped down as Soka Gakkai general director, the highest position in the organization at that time, a young Daisaku Ikeda strove arduously to support and assist him, opening the way for him to become the second Soka Gakkai president.

In January 1951, Mr. Toda's businesses were in serious financial trouble. In the summer of 1950, the relevant authorities had ordered him to suspend business operations.

The moment his fortunes changed for the worse, people whom Mr. Toda had helped and supported enormously over the years deserted him, one after the other. Some even hurled curses at him as they departed, revealing their total lack of gratitude.

For all practical purposes, I was the only one who remained by his side. Young as I was, I worked frantically to help rebuild his businesses, often being showered with insults and abuse from creditors and others. For months on end, I received no salary and often didn't have enough to eat. I wished that I could at least have had better health to fulfill my task. I agonized, struggled, and worked hard to find a way forward, chanting intensely throughout. Every night, I would read the Daishonin's writings.

After careful consideration, Mr. Toda decided to step down as Soka Gakkai general director. [The announcement of his intention to resign was made on August 24, 1950.]

Feeling at a loss, I asked him: "If you resign as general director, does that mean that the next general director will become my mentor?" He said: "Number one, though I cause you nothing but hardship, I am your mentor."

That was an unforgettable moment in my life.

A month later, on September 21, President Ikeda expressed his determination to continue supporting his mentor in a poem that he gave to him: "Still serving / an old / and mystic bond / though others change, / I alter not." In reply, Mr. Toda composed these two poems on the spot and presented them to his youthful disciple: "Whenever I stand / on the field of battle, / you are the trusty sword / I always keep / at my side" and "My glory as king is fading / and my power waning; / though death may claim me, / I will leave behind you, / my crown."

I don't particularly like talking about myself, but I feel it's vital that members of the youth division, who will carry the Soka Gakkai into the future, know everything that took place.

Today, I will share just a bit about what really happened at that time.

Close to noon on January 6, 1951, I was called to Mr. Toda's home and shown to his room. I had just turned 23.

Usually, Mr. Toda brimmed with boundless vigor and confidence, but on that day, he looked gaunt and utterly exhausted. His businesses were going from bad to worse, and the situation was truly dire. He wore a grave expression. There were just three of us in the room, Mr. Toda, his wife, and I.

"I have something very important to say to you today," he said to me. "If something should happen to me, I'd like to completely entrust both the Soka Gakkai and my businesses to you. Would you agree to take all this on?"

In a firmer tone, he continued: "Whatever may happen, as long as you and I remain true to our mission, the time will come when we fulfill the Daishonin's wishes. For the sake of the Soka Gakkai, I want you to press ahead strongly, no matter what anyone may say."

I solemnly took this as Mr. Toda's final will and testament to me.

In my diary that evening, I wrote the vow I made that day, taking inspiration from the spirit of a legendary father and son of Japan's feudal past [the great warrior Kusunoki Masashige and his son Masatsura, who carried on his struggle]:

"Mr. Toda is like Masashige, while I am like Masatsura. Mrs. Toda wept. I will never forget throughout my life the emotion, solemnity, and tears; the sense of mission, karmic bonds, and life's worth that I have experienced today. It has been decided that I will be his successor.

"A stormy year has dawned, and it progresses moment by moment. Overcoming all sufferings, I will strive throughout this year as a man and as a youth."

I have striven with all my being to fulfill the vow I made to my mentor that day. All alone I stood by Mr. Toda, our great mentor in the struggle for kosen-rufu, and did everything I could to support him. This is the history of the Soka Gakkai, and a true example of mentor and disciple. Herein lies the spirit and starting point of the Soka Gakkai.

There was virtually no one, not even among the Soka Gakkai's top leaders, who truly understood his painful predicament. Even the general director who replaced him for a time criticized and spoke ill of him. But however others might behave, I had resolved in my heart to see to it that Mr. Toda would become the Soka Gakkai's second president and that he could freely take the lead for kosen-rufu.

I chanted for Mr. Toda and the Soka Gakkai. I chanted throughout the relentless struggles we faced. I was constantly chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, awake and asleep, walking or riding in a car or train, whenever I had a spare moment, I chanted.

Placing all my faith in the power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, I gave my whole life to winning over the cruel onslaughts that beset us in society and to clear the way for Mr. Toda to become the Soka Gakkai's president.

Finally, on May 3, 1951, having weathered and survived a maelstrom of bitter obstacles, Mr. Toda became the Soka Gakkai's second president. On the day of that grand ceremony, Mr. Toda said to me quietly, with tears in his eyes: "I owe this all to you. Thank you."

Toward the end of his life, at a gathering attended by my parents-in-law, who were pioneer members, and several top Soka Gakkai leaders, Mr. Toda reportedly said: "I have been truly fortunate in life to have a fine disciple."

Mr. Toda, too, was the only one who, when Mr. Makiguchi was arrested for resisting the directives of the wartime militarist government, went to prison with him and fought alongside him until the very end. One such disciple makes all the difference.

I, in turn, dedicated my entire life to supporting and assisting my mentor, Mr. Toda. That is why I became the third president.

In this supremely noble struggle of the oneness of mentor and disciple, we can find the fundamental cause for the great development the Soka Gakkai has achieved to this day. I hope you will never forget this fact.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, January 6, 2006.

Section 28.14: Reporting Victory to One's Mentor

On becoming second president of the Soka Gakkai, which then had only around 3,000 members, Josei Toda boldly vowed to realize a membership of 750,000 households. This towering goal was achieved in just six and a half years thanks to the tireless efforts of President Ikeda, who made his mentor's heart his own and strove with unwavering determination to realize his mentor's vision.

On becoming second Soka Gakkai president, Mr. Toda declared: "I will through my own efforts reach the membership goal of 750,000 households. Should I fail to do so, don't hold a funeral for me."

The majority of his disciples at that time, however, dismissed this important declaration, which articulated the great vow he would devote his life to, as little more than a fantasy. The Soka Gakkai's newspaper, the Seikyo Shimbun, didn't even report his statement.

When Mr. Toda became president in May 1951, the monthly propagation goal of even the top chapters was a mere 50 households. But I realized that the path of a disciple is to make the vision of one's mentor a reality, no matter how challenging it might be. As Mr. Toda's disciple, his vow became my vow, and achieving it became my personal mission.

But propagation efforts throughout the organization failed to advance. In fact, in their hearts, everyone had given up. The longtime leaders did nothing but lament and moan about the thick wall that loomed before them and blocked the way to growth. I, however, saw it as a time ripe for action, and I leapt onto the main battlefield of kosen-rufu as the chapter advisor of Tokyo's Kamata Chapter.

This happened in the cold month of February 1952, the month of Mr. Toda's 52nd birthday. I proclaimed Mr. Toda's message far and wide. I urged the members to follow the path of mentor and disciple. This is because when we align our hearts with the spirit of our mentor for kosen-rufu, the wisdom and courage innate to the Bodhisattvas of the Earth well forth within us.

Seeking to respond to Mr. Toda, the members joined me with renewed determination and set to work courageously. Our efforts brought us joy, hope, adventure, and energy. Everyone eagerly took part. And in one dramatic sweep, Kamata achieved the previously unheard-of record of 201 new households in a single month. We realized that if we tried, we could succeed. A decisive breakthrough toward realizing Mr. Toda's membership goal of 750,000 households had been made. Kamata had triumphed! Great progress toward victory in my hometown of Tokyo had begun.

The Lotus Sutra teaches that the Buddha has the powers to "understand the way, open up the way, and preach the way" (cf. LSOC5, 135). We who uphold the Mystic Law can also bring forth these powers.

As Mr. Toda's direct disciple, I visited areas throughout Tokyo and the rest of Japan, including Joto [eastern Tokyo], Bunkyo, Sapporo, Osaka, Kansai, Yamaguchi, Chugoku, Arakawa, and Katsushika. Everywhere I went, I opened a bright new path for kosen-rufu and unfailingly raised a victory banner of mentor and disciple.

Each day saw incredibly difficult challenges. Nothing was ever easy. It was a struggle to achieve the seemingly impossible, to realize a feat that would astonish everyone.

What was the main cause for my success in that struggle? In short, it was that my heart was always one with my mentor. I reported on everything to Mr. Toda and received his guidance. I cannot count the times that I got off the train at Meguro, the station nearest to where he lived, and dashed to his home to report to him on the latest developments.

I also constantly asked myself, what would Mr. Toda do, what would he say if he saw me now? Was I behaving in a way that I could be proud of if he were watching? As I exerted myself wholeheartedly, I would picture in my mind Mr. Toda sometimes nodding in smiling approval and saying, "Well done!" and sometimes giving me strict encouragement, his voice thundering, "Try harder!"

Day after day, I sternly reminded myself: "Buddhism is about winning, so defeat is unacceptable. If I fail, Mr. Toda's vision for kosen-rufu will suffer a setback. I must not be defeated. I must be able to report victory to him." That firmly focused prayer in my heart became a source of strength and wisdom. My bold and vigorous efforts to fulfill my vow opened the way forward and set in motion the protective functions of the universe. My sole wish was to make Mr. Toda happy, that unwavering pledge kept me striving tirelessly, year after year.

Forward! Forward! Forward!

Victory! Victory! Victory!

I exerted myself fully as a true and devoted disciple and will therefore never have a single regret.

Through the shared struggle of mentor and disciple, the Soka Gakkai surmounted and triumphed over every obstacle, and finally, in December 1957, achieved the membership goal of 750,000 households. Mr. Toda's great vow was fulfilled to the letter.

The mentor's challenge is the disciple's challenge. The disciple's victory is the mentor's victory. The brilliant achievements of mentor and disciple endure for all time.

The way of mentor and disciple, in particular, prayer based on the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple, is the heart of Nichiren Buddhism.

The Daishonin writes: "If lay believers and their teacher pray with differing minds, their prayers will be as futile as trying to kindle a fire on water" (WND-1, 795). He declares that unless our hearts are united with our mentor, our prayers will not be fulfilled.

By contrast, if the prayers of mentor and disciple are perfectly aligned, they will definitely come to be realized and even make the impossible possible.

This is the formula of Nichiren Buddhism.

From a speech at a representative conference, Tokyo, May 3, 2009.

Section 28.15: Disciples Taking Full Responsibility for Kosen-rufu

President Ikeda recounts how, as a central leader of the youth division, following the guidance and direction of President Toda and making his mentor's spirit his own, he stood in the vanguard of every effort and opened wide the path for kosen-rufu.

In March 1954, Mr. Toda personally appointed me to a new leadership position. He said to me: "It's time for you to take the lead, Daisaku. I want you to be the youth division chief of staff. I've grown a bit weary, so I'm entrusting everything to you."

It would soon have been three years since Mr. Toda, leading some 3,000 members, had become second Soka Gakkai president and begun his great effort to expand our movement for kosen-rufu. He was the architect of all our plans and overall vision for kosen-rufu, and by that time, propagation efforts had lifted our membership to close to 100,000 households.

Still, it wasn't the dramatic development he had hoped for.

The entire Soka Gakkai in those days rested squarely on Mr. Toda's shoulders. He took the lead in everything, from giving personal guidance to lecturing on Nichiren Daishonin's writings, from fostering young people to leading regional propagation campaigns.

If the Soka Gakkai were likened to a ship, he was both the propeller driving it forward and the captain at the wheel, steering its course.

The engine, the members' faith based on the Gohonzon, was accelerating. Only when that force was transferred to the propeller, and the wheel was steered properly, could the ship advance through the waves breaking over its bow.

Seeking to build a new propeller, he appointed me to a position with full responsibility for kosen-rufu and trained me thoroughly.

On March 30, the day he appointed me to this position, I wrote in my diary: "As I take on a more and more central role in the Soka Gakkai, I must propel kosen-rufu forward. This is my personal mission. Flowers exist to bloom. That is their mission. I exist to spread the Mystic Law. That is my mission." Then, expressing my determination to stand up and take part in the great battle between the Buddha and devilish forces, I recorded this passage from the Daishonin's writings: "In the final analysis, unless we succeed [in our struggle], these disasters will continue unabated" (WND-1, 1114). Buddhism is about winning, and I engraved in my heart that it is my mission to be victorious.

At the beginning of that year, Mr. Toda had attended a youth division leaders meeting, where he had powerfully declared: "I entrust the future of the Soka Gakkai to the youth!"

My morning study sessions with my mentor were still taking place, and in his constant urging that I study, I sensed a special intensity, almost as if he were imparting his last wishes to me. It was against this backdrop that I was appointed youth division chief of staff, one of the most central leadership positions in the Soka Gakkai.

I resolved: "My growth will lead to the growth of the youth division, no, to the development of the Soka Gakkai as a whole."

No matter what might happen, I was determined to persevere and press forward, even if just a step or two. I read the Daishonin's writings every day, in any free moment I could find. I also tried to read as many books as I could. Taking full responsibility both at work and in Soka Gakkai activities, I exerted myself to the fullest. Each day was an unrelenting struggle and decisive challenge.

Because I was so incredibly busy and my physical condition was poor, I fell into a state of chronic exhaustion, constantly running a fever and on the verge of collapse. But Mr. Toda sternly exhorted me to defeat the negative functions in my life: "What you're facing is a battle against the three obstacles and four devils. There's no course but to take all your pain and suffering directly to the Gohonzon and chant with all your heart to break through."

I vowed to become strong, standing up powerfully and living powerfully.

Determined to fundamentally transform my karma in body and mind, I intrepidly took on the pounding waves that assailed me.

After Mr. Toda appointed me youth division chief of staff, he never gave me specific instructions about what to do. He trained us youth to take full responsibility and think for ourselves.

I always focused on what was happening on the ground. Whenever there were problem areas that needed to be addressed, I always took steps to rectify them with lightning speed and a clear vision of the long-term future of kosen-rufu. I was determined to support and protect our members and allow them to engage freely and enjoyably in Soka Gakkai activities.

It's no good just sitting behind a desk and devising strategies. Leaders need to personally take their place on the front lines of activities, working harder than anyone else and summoning all their wisdom to find positive solutions.

Mr. Toda taught me an important leadership lesson: "You cannot become a powerful driving force for our movement unless you always remember to be strict with yourself and generous and accepting of others."

He often scolded me in those days, for being late in reporting information, for poorly handling some matter, or even, sometimes, for things that I wasn't personally involved in.

This was all part of his strict but compassionate guidance, which I feel fortunate to have received, imparted with the wish that the youth division take full responsibility for kosen-rufu.

Standing alone, striving with this determination was the only way for us to respond to our mentor's profound expectations.

I called on my fellow youth division members to also stand up resolutely and take responsibility for victory in their respective areas, to rush to assist members in those areas facing intense challenges for kosen-rufu and pave the way for completely transforming the situation.

I strove my hardest to be a model for others, blazing new paths forward, and set in motion a groundswell of fresh victories and expansion.

In May 1954, a little over a month after I was appointed chief of staff, a gathering of 5,000 youth division members was held. Just six months later, we could hold a meeting twice that size, attended by 10,000 youth.

The following year, we achieved a victory in the Otaru Debate, and set a new propagation record in the Sapporo Summer Campaign. In the Osaka Campaign of 1956, we established the indelible golden record of 11,111 new households joining in a single chapter in one month. That was followed by the resounding success of the Yamaguchi Campaign. I also secured a decisive victory in the Yubari Coal Miners Union Incident, a struggle against forces that harassed Soka Gakkai members and threatened their religious freedom.

Note on terminology: The Otaru Debate was a public debate between Soka Gakkai representatives and priests of Nichiren Shu (the Minobu school of Nichiren Buddhism), held at the Otaru Civic Hall in the city of Otaru, Hokkaido, on March 11, 1955. The debate was won by the Soka Gakkai side, with a youthful President Ikeda acting as emcee. The Sapporo Summer Campaign saw Sapporo take the lead in a propagation effort under way in 45 places nationwide, attaining a record of 388 new member households in 10 days in August 1955. In the Osaka Campaign of May 1956, the Kansai members, uniting around a young Daisaku Ikeda, introduced 11,111 households to the practice. The Yamaguchi Campaign unfolded over three months spanning October and November 1956 and January 1957, during which membership grew almost tenfold from 459 to 4,073 households. The Yubari Coal Miners Union Incident was a case of blatant religious discrimination in which miners in Yubari, Hokkaido, were threatened with losing their jobs due to their Soka Gakkai membership.

In 1961, the year after I became third Soka Gakkai president, we held a gathering of 100,000 young men, filling the National Stadium [in Sendagaya, Tokyo]. The public was astonished, and the media rushed to cover the event. It marked the fulfillment of the ultimate goal I had set when I was youth division chief of staff, and I proudly raised the banner of total victory for all the world to see.

None of these achievements was easy. Each entailed a fierce struggle that would daunt anyone as being too challenging or even impossible. But as the disciple of a great mentor, I would not accept defeat.

Each was a battle to break through barriers, a struggle against injustice, a fight for what was right, an effort to demonstrate the mission and greatness of our Soka movement.

Now it is time for you, members of the youth division who are my genuine disciples, to proudly make your stand!

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, January 6, 2004.

Section 28.16: July 3, A Solemn Day of Mentor and Disciple

In a period when Japan's political world was experiencing deep ideological divisions, the Soka Gakkai fielded political candidates who would speak up for the people, who were long overlooked, and work to build a society of peace and human rights. This also marked the beginning of a fierce battle against the devilish nature of authority. In July 1957, the young Daisaku Ikeda was arrested and imprisoned for two weeks on false charges by the authorities. Here, President Ikeda describes how he bore the brunt of this attack in order to protect President Toda, the Soka Gakkai, and its members.

July 3 is the date when President Toda was finally released from detention in 1945. He was filled with the resolve to carry on the lofty vision of his mentor, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, who died in prison for his beliefs.

It is also the date on which I, President Toda's direct disciple, was taken into police custody 12 years later, in 1957.

In "The Opening of the Eyes," Nichiren Daishonin states that persecution by the ruler of the nation is certain to arise (cf. WND-1, 239). And in exact accord with this stern prediction, President Makiguchi, President Toda, and I all suffered persecution at the hands of the ruling authorities.

This is unequivocal proof that the heritage passed on by the Daishonin, the mission of establishing the correct teaching for the peace of the land and realizing kosen-rufu, flows powerfully in the Soka Gakkai.

On July 3, 1957, having received a request to appear for questioning at the Osaka Prefectural Police Headquarters, I made my way there, prepared to cast myself into the turbulent currents awaiting me.

My flight from Hokkaido had a stopover at Haneda Airport in Tokyo, and my mentor, Josei Toda, was there waiting to meet me. At that time, he said: "Daisaku, should death overtake you, I will rush to your side and throw myself upon you and accompany you in death." There were tears in his eyes. I remember his warmth as he embraced my thin frame tightly.

I was arrested by the Osaka Prefectural Police around 7:00 in the evening on July 3, inexplicably, the same time and date when my mentor had been released from prison 12 years earlier.

Unfortunately, a few Soka Gakkai members had breached campaign rules during the House of Councillors by-election held in Osaka that April, in which the Soka Gakkai fielded a candidate. The authorities concluded that this had been part of an organized illegal activity carried out at my instruction as the leader of the campaign effort. They therefore arrested me on the unfounded charge of violating the Public Offices Election Law. A short time after my arrest, they moved me to the Osaka Detention Center.

I recalled what President Toda had often said: "If you are ever put in prison [as a result of government persecution], accept that you might spend the rest of your life there and fight on till the very end!"

Without such determination, one cannot fight for one's beliefs in prison.

I was subjected to harsh interrogations for days and nights on end. It was hot and humid in Osaka, with temperatures around 30 degrees Celsius [86 degrees Fahrenheit]. I was innocent. I had no crime to admit to. But the chief prosecutor revealed his devious intent to me. If I didn't confess, he said, they would search the Soka Gakkai Headquarters and arrest President Toda.

My mentor was already very weak, and to be imprisoned again could very well mean his death. To protect him, therefore, I decided the best course of action would be to admit culpability at this point and then set about winning an acquittal when the case went to court.

And so it was that on July 17, two weeks after my arrest, I was released from the Osaka Detention Center.

From an essay series "Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, July 7, 2006.

Section 28.17: An Indomitable Struggle for Human Rights

After his arrest on groundless charges, President Ikeda won an indisputable victory by proving his innocence following a four-and-a-half-year legal battle. Looking back on that struggle for human rights in his novel The Human Revolution, he recounts the triumphant story of mentor and disciple fighting fearlessly against the devilish workings of authority.

From early in the morning on July 17, Soka Gakkai members dressed in light summer clothes could be seen standing around the entrance to the Osaka Detention Center.

Their faces conveyed a mix of emotions, hope at the prospect of seeing Shin'ichi released and the matter settled for now mingled with indignation at the unjust actions of the prosecutor's office.

Small groups of Soka Gakkai members could also be seen near the Nakanoshima Civic Hall across the river from the detention center, even though the Osaka Rally [which had been called to protest Shin'ichi's arrest] was not scheduled to start there till evening.

At around 10 minutes past noon, a sudden stir rippled through the crowd assembled outside the gate. Shin'ichi Yamamoto, clad in a casual shirt, emerged from the detention center entrance. Cheers and applause erupted.

Shin'ichi smiled as he acknowledged the waiting members.

"Thank you! I apologize for the worry I've caused you. As you can see, I'm okay!" he reassured them.

The members spontaneously united in a victory cheer. Their voices resounded strongly. Tears glistened in their eyes, reflecting the golden sunlight.

Hearing that Josei Toda would soon be arriving at Itami Airport in Osaka, Shin'ichi immediately set off to meet him.

Toda saw Shin'ichi and smiled. It was then that Shin'ichi noticed that Toda had grown even more gaunt in the two weeks since he had last seen him. His heart ached at the sight.

"Sensei, I'm sorry to have caused you so much worry."

"More important, how is your health?"

Knowing Shin'ichi wasn't physically strong, Toda could not help being anxious about his well-being.

"Yes, I'm fine." Shin'ichi held back the tears that sprang to his eyes at his frail mentor's deep concern for him. "I am not beaten. After all, wasn't the day I was detained the same date you were released from prison?"

Toda nodded silently, his eyes gleaming.

"Shin'ichi, the real battle still lies ahead of us. Everything is understood by the Gohonzon. The outcome of this battle will be decided in court. The chief justice ought to understand. If we can get him to understand the truth, then it'll be fine."

He said this as if he knew all that was in Shin'ichi's heart.

At 6:00 p.m., the start of the Osaka Rally was announced.

Outside, the sky suddenly grew dark, and within minutes of the first few raindrops a torrential downpour ensued, the wind blowing in great gusts. Lightning slashed the dark clouds, and thunder roared with earthshaking intensity.

Though exposed to the violent thunderstorm, not a single person in the crowd outside made a move to leave.

Shin'ichi's words were charged with the unshakable conviction that blazed in his heart: "Let us rise to this challenge with the conviction that final victory belongs to those who strive tenaciously in faith, to those who steadfastly embrace the Gohonzon, and to the correct teaching of Nichiren Buddhism!"

Many members had tears in their eyes. Some stifled sobs, while others cried unabashedly. These were not tears of sorrow or grief, but an outpouring of the profound emotion inspired by Shin'ichi's dauntless spirit and determination to challenge the devilish workings of authority.

From The Human Revolution, vol. 11, "Osaka" chapter.

On January 25, 1962, the 84th and final session of the trial began at 9:30 a.m. in the Osaka District Court. Everyone waited anxiously for Judge Yusuke Tagami to deliver the verdict.

"The court finds the defendant, Shin'ichi Yamamoto, not guilty."

Both the Soka Gakkai's integrity and Shin'ichi's innocence had finally been proven; the truth had triumphed over the insidious machinations of authority.

Note: Following the ruling, the prosecution declined to appeal and the Osaka District Court's verdict was final.

Shin'ichi recalled how Toda had told him that realizing kosen-rufu would necessitate a fierce struggle against the devilish nature of authority.

Tsunesaburo Makiguchi had died in prison, and Josei Toda had spent two years behind bars. Shin'ichi, too, had been jailed, albeit only for two weeks, and the ensuing trial had lasted four and a half years. Thinking of these things, he was struck by a powerful realization that it was the Soka Gakkai's inescapable destiny to battle against the devilish nature of authority.

At this time, unknown to others, Shin'ichi Yamamoto's unbreakable resolve to struggle for human rights as long as he lived began to form in his heart.

From The Human Revolution, vol. 11, "Trial" chapter.

Section 28.18: March 16, An Eternal Ceremony of Mentor and Disciple

President Ikeda recalls the immortal ceremony of March 16, 1958, in which President Toda entrusted him with the future of kosen-rufu, and their shared struggle based on the oneness of mentor and disciple.

I have fulfilled my vow to my mentor.

I have fulfilled my vow to my fellow members.

I have fulfilled every goal I resolved to achieve.

From that day when we gathered at the foot of Mount Fuji, a new phase of development in our movement for kosen-rufu began.

It was a cold day. A majestic Mount Fuji watched over us.

The ceremony on March 16 was festive and filled with hope. President Toda announced that he was passing the baton of kosen-rufu to the youth. The hearts of his young disciples burned with the bright flame of mission.

On that day in 1958, some 6,000 young disciples gathered by the side of our mentor, President Toda, whose remaining time was short. We all celebrated the day with great joy and excitement. Brave young men and women dedicated to kosen-rufu had assembled from all over Japan. They shook hands, patted each other on the shoulder, and talked and laughed together. It was as if they were rejoicing at their future victories.

Many events and activities were held throughout that month of March 1958, which could be described the culmination of President Toda's life and achievements.

When my mentor arrived at the head temple at the end of February, he was in very poor health. Several times, his physician had to be called to care for him. But ill as he was, the voice of our mentor in kosen-rufu remained as firm and penetrating as ever.

At one point, he said: "Daisaku, do not leave my side. I want you to stay with me around the clock!"

On March 1, he said to me: "Daisaku, I leave the rest to you. I'm counting on you!"

Soon afterward, he suggested that, on March 16, we hold a ceremony that would serve as a trial run or dress rehearsal for kosen-rufu.

President Toda knew that he would not recover, that he could not again lead the movement for kosen-rufu. He had lived his life in accord with the Daishonin's words "Life is limited; we must not begrudge it. What we should ultimately aspire to is the Buddha land" (WND-1, 214).

March 16 was a ceremony to affirm for all eternity President Toda's selfless spirit, and to pass that legacy on to the next generation. It was also a ceremony of just two individuals, a ceremony of the oneness of mentor and disciple, in which he handed me the baton of kosen-rufu.

Appreciating the profound significance of the event, I took full responsibility and dedicated myself wholeheartedly to its preparations.

Though he was growing weaker day by day, President Toda battled intrepidly against the "devil," or hindrance, of death so that he could live to March 16 and fully entrust the future to me and the rest of the Soka Gakkai youth.

I remained constantly at his side, serving and supporting him. He regularly called me to see him and spoke to me about important future plans for kosen-rufu.

I received his every word as his final testament to me. They were all a preface to the great ceremony of entrustment to his successors that was approaching.

Even before the date of the ceremony had been decided, he took a series of steps to encourage the youth, including arranging for pork soup to be prepared and served to them when they arrived at the head temple early in the morning.

"I will lead the gathering," he said, but he was so weak that it was difficult for him to even walk.

I instructed several trusted youth to build a litter to carry him. When he saw it, he said: "It's too big! It would be useless in battle!" To the very end, he poured every last drop of his energy into teaching and guiding his beloved disciples. I was so moved with gratitude that I wept in my heart.

Responding to our sincere effort, however, he agreed to ride in the litter on the day, and from there serenely took the lead. The young men shouldering the litter beamed with joy, their brows glistening with beads of perspiration.

At the grand ceremony, President Toda declared: "The Soka Gakkai is the king of the religious world!"

I engraved this impassioned cry, this lion's roar, in my heart. And I vowed deeply to make it a reality for all time. Being "king of the religious world" means being king of the realms of philosophy and thought.

To us, the ceremony of March 16 seemed the very embodiment of the words the Daishonin cites in his oral teachings: "The assembly on Holy Eagle Peak continues in solemn state and has not yet disbanded" (OTT, 135).

One day not long after the ceremony, President Toda, perceiving the signs of degeneration in the Nichiren Shoshu priesthood, told me sternly: "Never let up in the battle against corruption."

He had a clear premonition that the priesthood was growing increasingly impure and corrupt. This was one of his final messages to me.

March 16 is the eternal starting point of the "true cause," when all disciples stand up to carry on their mentor's legacy. I set out each day with renewed determination; for me, each day is March 16.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, March 8, 1998.

Section 28.19: April 2, Remembering My Mentor, Josei Toda

President Ikeda describes how, as President Toda's successor, he stood up resolutely, with a stand-alone spirit, to achieve the mission of worldwide kosen-rufu entrusted to him by his mentor.

On the evening of March 16, 1958, after the grand ceremony held at the foot of Mount Fuji, President Toda said to me: "Daisaku, there are more urgent matters that need to be dealt with at the Headquarters, so I want you to return to Tokyo ahead of me and attend to them."

I did as he asked and, after taking care of a mountain of work that had piled up in my absence, I rushed back to the head temple. President Toda had grown even weaker, but he smiled with deep relief when he saw me.

In the following days, as he lay in bed, he often called me to his side. He also instructed me to spread my bedding at the foot of his and sleep there during the night.

He sometimes asked me what I was reading.

He told me that he had read the Compendium of Eighteen Histories and spoke to me about the ancient Chinese statesman Xiao He. On conquering the realm, Liu Bang, founder of China's Han dynasty, had praised Xiao He as his most worthy minister. This was because the latter had made arduous efforts to ensure that the soldiers on the front lines could fight their hardest by arranging a steady supply of provisions and weapons for them. In the same way, President Toda said, it was essential that the Soka Gakkai always protect, appreciate, and commend those who work hard behind the scenes. That was the way to ensure the organization would flourish forever. He repeatedly stressed this important aspect of leadership.

One morning during those final days, he said to me: "Daisaku, yesterday I dreamed I went to Mexico."

A passage from the Daishonin's writing "On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime" states: "Life at each moment [or our mind in a single life moment] permeates the entire realm of phenomena" (WND-1, 3). President Toda's mind was traveling the vastness of the globe, extending even to Latin America, on the other side of the world from Japan.

"They were all waiting, waiting. Daisaku, the world is your true stage."

Stretching his hand out from under his futon and grasping mine, he entrusted me with the far-reaching journey for peace, for worldwide kosen-rufu.

About a week before he died, President Toda said to a group of youth: "After I am gone, the person who will succeed me as third president will take full leadership for our movement and set forth the guiding principles and means for worldwide kosen-rufu. The third president will firmly establish the groundwork so that from the fourth president on, any fair and honest person can serve equally well as president. If you do as the third president instructs, you will most certainly achieve worldwide kosen-rufu."

Several of the youth there had the presence of mind to realize the importance of what he was saying and wrote down his words.

Everything depends on the disciples.

As the Daishonin clearly asserts: "If a teacher has a good disciple, both will gain the fruit of Buddhahood, but if a teacher fosters a bad disciple, both will fall into hell. If teacher and disciple are of different minds, they will never accomplish anything" (WND-1, 909).

On March 30, 1958, I returned to Tokyo and, conferring with President Toda's family, made arrangements for his hospitalization. The next day, I returned to my mentor's side.

Shortly after 2:00 a.m. on April 1, President Toda left by car from the Rikyo-bo lodging temple. He was transported lying down in his futon. I accompanied him without sleeping a wink. He was placed on the 4:20 a.m. limited express sleeper train from Numazu Station and arrived at Tokyo Station just before 7:00. From there, he was taken to Nihon University Hospital in Surugadai. Asking that he be given the best of care, I left the hospital just after 9:00.

The next day, April 2, was cloudy and chilly.

With a great sense of urgency, I convened an emergency meeting with youth division leaders that morning. I proposed that, from the following day, representatives gather each morning for a week at the Soka Gakkai Headquarters to do gongyo and chant together for President Toda's recovery. I wanted to do whatever I could for my mentor right now. I would have given him my life if I could. I prayed for his recovery. I prayed with all my heart.

When we learned that our mentor had shown signs of improvement during the morning, we rejoiced. I still clearly remember that we redoubled our prayers at the news.

At 5:00 p.m., a joint meeting of the board of directors and top youth division leaders convened at the Soka Gakkai Headquarters to discuss the Headquarters leaders meeting scheduled for the following day and the Study Department entrance examinations four days later [on April 6]. We were all confident of President Toda's recovery.

When our meeting was almost finished, the building's caretaker knocked on the door. There was a phone call from President Toda's son, who was at the hospital.

I ran to take the call in the caretaker's office and received the tragic and stunning news: "My father has just passed away."

It is still impossible for me to describe even now the shock I experienced at that moment. It is something I alone must keep forever in my heart.

My mentor, Josei Toda, died of acute heart failure at 6:30 p.m., nobly bringing his life to a close, or to use the words of the Lotus Sutra, "appearing to enter nirvana as an expedient means" (cf. LSOC16, 271).

I recalled the peaceful expression he wore when I accompanied him to the hospital the day before. That time had become our final parting in this life.

Overcome with emotion, I went to convey the news to the others. We immediately held a conference to discuss crucial matters. Then I rushed to the hospital.

That evening, I wrote in my diary: "Oh, April 2. This day will be recorded forever in the history of the Soka Gakkai, in the history of my life and the lives of his disciples. The life of a great hero of the Mystic Law, a towering figure of kosen-rufu, has ended."

But Buddhism is profound, and its principles are true. Though my mentor has passed away, he exists for all eternity in the depths of my being, in "the palace of the ninth consciousness [the Buddha nature], the unchanging reality that reigns over all of life's functions" (WND-1, 832). There, he encourages and spurs me on to keep fighting as his disciple for kosen-rufu, for nothing but kosen-rufu.

My mentor gave unstintingly of himself. He selflessly propagated the Mystic Law. He strove bravely and vigorously. He charged forward intrepidly. He persevered through hardships to spread the correct teaching. He refuted the erroneous and revealed the true. These qualities comprise the heart of his ever-victorious fighting spirit, which he passed on to his true disciple.

That is why I could not let the Soka Gakkai's momentum falter for an instant. I vowed with the blazing energy of a new day's sun: "Arrogant disciples will eventually quit the organization. Devious, self-serving disciples will begin to speak ill of the Soka Gakkai. Fearful is the fickleness of the human heart. Fearful is ingratitude to one's mentor. Now is the time to raise the golden curtain of never-ending victory, to open the second act in the decisive battle for kosen-rufu! I will stand up and I will win!"

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, April 1 and 5, 2007.

Section 28.23: A Chronicle of My Mentor's Greatness

President Ikeda describes his decision to follow up his novel The Human Revolution with the sequel, The New Human Revolution.

The first installment of my serialized novel The Human Revolution was published in the January 1, 1965, issue of the Seikyo Shimbun.

My original plan was to compose a biographical novel describing Mr. Toda's life from his release from prison on July 3, 1945, until his death.

Over time, however, I came to realize that I could not convey the true greatness of his accomplishments as long as I restricted myself to the events of his lifetime. It is a constant of history that an individual's true greatness, or the real worth of a philosophy or system of thought, is often not recognized at the time, but only later becomes correctly understood and fully appreciated.

And kosen-rufu, the grand undertaking to which Mr. Toda had dedicated his life, was not something that could be achieved in a single lifetime. It was a struggle that had to be passed down from mentor to disciple. In other words, its success or failure could be judged only by the efforts and achievements of the disciples who carried on his work after he was no longer there.

Disciples inherit the mentor's vow and strive to realize the mentor's vision. This struggle of genuine disciples and successors to advance kosen-rufu in reality is the very essence of the oneness of mentor and disciple. Without chronicling that struggle, it would be impossible to communicate the true greatness of Presidents Toda and Makiguchi.

Having arrived at this conclusion, after completing volume 12 of The Human Revolution, which ends with Mr. Toda's death and the events that follow, I began to write The New Human Revolution.

In this new novel, I wished to outline the true path of mentor and disciple and secure the everlasting flow of kosen-rufu for the happiness and peace of all humanity. And I continue to write The New Human Revolution to clearly record the formula for the eternal development of the Soka Gakkai, the driving force for kosen-rufu.

From an essay series "Our Brilliant Path to Victory," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, September 21, 2010.

Section 28.24: On the Completion of The New Human Revolution

The final installment of President Ikeda's serialized novel The New Human Revolution was published in the September 8, 2018, issue of the Seikyo Shimbun. This is an excerpt from an essay he wrote the following week, in which he calls on members around the world to join him in making fresh strides in advancing kosen-rufu.

On September 8, the serialization of the 30th and final volume of The New Human Revolution ended.

The whole process, starting from The Human Revolution, which I began writing in Okinawa [in December 1964], has taken 54 years.

From the outset, I was determined to devote myself to this undertaking as long as I should live. And with the sincere support of my fellow members, I have gained the great benefit of "prolonging my life through faith." As a result, I have seen these works to their conclusion amid the great development of worldwide kosen-rufu, which I had vowed to Presidents Makiguchi and Toda to achieve.

Note on terminology: Prolonging one's life through faith is a concept based on the passage in the "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra that reads: "We beg you to cure us and let us live out our lives!" (LSOC16, 269). This is in the section that explains the parable of the outstanding physician, who gives "good medicine" to his children who have "drunk poison" (that is, succumbed to delusion), and who implore him to cure their illness. Through taking this good medicine (that is, embracing faith in the wonderful Law of the Lotus Sutra), they are cured and able to enjoy many more years of life.

As a disciple, I am filled with deep emotion and cannot find words to express my gratitude.

I would like to reiterate my sincerest appreciation to everyone in Japan and throughout the world who supported this endeavor in every possible way.

I am humbled to hear many say they are sad to see the series come to an end. But there is no end to the challenge of human revolution that we undertake as mentor and disciples.

I am reminded of something I once saw at a Fife and Drum Corps performance, a young woman at the rear of the stage swiftly dampening the reverberations of her percussion instrument with her hand after she played. To me, her action conveyed the message: "Don't linger on your achievements; always move on to the next challenge." This spirit of "true cause," of continuously moving forward from the present moment, is the heart of Nichiren Buddhism. The curtain falling on one challenge is the curtain rising on the next.

Note on terminology: True cause, also the mystic principle of true cause, refers to how Nichiren Buddhism directly expounds the true cause for enlightenment as Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which is the Law of life and the universe. It teaches a way of Buddhist practice of always moving forward from this moment on and overcoming all problems and difficulties based on this fundamental Law.

That is the essence of the Daishonin's words: "Strengthen your faith day by day and month after month. Should you slacken in your resolve even a bit, devils will take advantage" (WND-1, 997).

Twenty-five years ago, in September 1993, just after I began writing The New Human Revolution, I gave a lecture at Harvard University titled "Mahayana Buddhism and Twenty-First-Century Civilization." In it, I posed the following questions. Does religion make people stronger, or does it weaken them? Does it make people better or worse? Are they made wiser or less so by religion?

A truly humanistic religion must enable people destined to live out their lives amid the turbulent currents of change to achieve constant growth and become stronger, better, and wiser. And Nichiren Buddhism, our religion of human revolution, makes this possible.

My motivation for writing The New Human Revolution was to engage in a life-to-life dialogue with young people throughout Japan and across the globe, just as my mentor had offered me one-to-one training at what I call "Toda University."

Now, youthful Bodhisattvas of the Earth worldwide are studying the spirit of human revolution and making Shin'ichi Yamamoto's heart their own. I am delighted to see them boldly and vigorously achieving proof of brilliant success in their lives and for kosen-rufu, just as I hoped.

The Human Revolution starts with the chapter "Dawn," describing how my mentor stood up alone to break through the darkness of war. The novel ends with the chapter "New Dawn," telling how his disciple, fully united with him in spirit, inherited his mission.

The New Human Revolution begins with the chapter "Sunrise." It describes Soka mentor and disciples embarking on the mission of worldwide kosen-rufu with the energy of the rising sun.

The novel is an account of my tireless efforts as an extension of my mentor to bring the compassionate light of Nichiren Buddhism to the world. It tells how I leaped in among the multitude of humanity, among the people, and stirred a whirlwind of dialogue.

And the chapter that brings the novel to a close is titled "Vow."

Nichiren Daishonin states: "My wish is that all my disciples make a great vow" (WND-1, 1003); and "The 'great vow' refers to the propagation of the Lotus Sutra" (OTT, 82).

By making the same great vow as our mentor to spread the Law of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can tap infinite power, the underlying strength of the noble Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

The sun of the vow of mentor and disciple is a beacon now shining ever more brightly, illuminating Mother Earth and the boundless future.

Our friends exist in every country and region. The world's people are waiting for us.

With fresh determination, let us embark anew toward worldwide kosen-rufu, the goal of world peace that humankind so earnestly longs for.

I will advance. Please advance, too.

I will fight. Please fight, too.

I will win. Please win, too.

Let us join together to spread the great light of human revolution and compose a new and magnificent epic of Soka mentor and disciples! Our journey to fulfill our vow will go on forever!

From an essay series "The Eternal Citadel of Soka," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, September 15, 2018.

Section 28.26: Carrying the Founding Spirit into the Future

At a meeting commemorating the 58th anniversary of the Soka Gakkai's founding, President Ikeda explains that within the context of the ten thousand years or more of the Latter Day of the Law, the Soka Gakkai is still in its founding phase. He urges members to carry on the founding spirit of the first three presidents and continue building the foundation for kosen-rufu.

The Soka Gakkai has confronted numerous hardships and overcome each one. This is the proof and honor of genuine disciples of Nichiren Daishonin.

Our founding president, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, used to say: "Unless you have the courage to be an enemy of those who are evil, you cannot be a friend to the good."

Unless we have the courage to combat injustice, we contribute to it.

He also said that while devilish functions will not bother to assail those who embrace the Mystic Law only for their own benefit, the three obstacles and four devils will inevitably descend with full force on those who oppose and struggle against great evil. Indeed, he said, the appearance of such obstacles earns us the name "practitioners" [as opposed to mere "believers"].

Such was Mr. Makiguchi's conviction and commitment based on the Daishonin's teachings. And true to his words, he battled with unwavering resolve against persecution by Japan's militarist government that had allied itself with State Shinto.

On November 18, 1944, exactly 14 years after the Soka Gakkai's founding, Mr. Makiguchi died in a bitterly cold prison because of his beliefs. He was 73 years old. At that time, the noble founding spirit he exemplified became a proud and immortal legacy.

Second president Josei Toda alone carried on this spirit of his mentor. And as the third president, I charged ahead as Mr. Toda's disciple, following in his footsteps. I strove tirelessly, with complete dedication, on the unsurpassed path of mentor and disciple. Therefore, I have no regrets and am not afraid of anything.

This legacy of persevering undefeated amid hardship that has been forged by the first three presidents pulses with the imperishable Soka Gakkai spirit.

Compared to Mr. Makiguchi's age when he died, I am still young [at 60]. I am determined to work 10 or 20 times harder for kosen-rufu than I have until now.

I especially hope that you, the youth division members, will strive with all your passion and power. This is to your own benefit, and it is the natural mission of youth. I look to you to carry on and spread the founding spirit of the first three presidents into the vast, uncharted future, and develop an amazing vision for kosen-rufu.

Our great journey of kosen-rufu will continue through the ten thousand years or more of the Latter Day of the Law and on into the infinite future. In that grand context, today we are still in the founding phase of our movement.

The Latin root of the English word foundation is fundus, meaning "bottom" or "base."

We can't develop a strong foundation or basis without experiencing all kinds of hardships and difficulties. All of the issues and problems arising today will serve to fortify our foundation so that it will endure forever. I am certain that it all accords with the Buddha's intent. In Buddhism, nothing is without meaning. Only by confronting, surmounting, and triumphing over each obstacle with courageous faith can we build a firm foundation for our magnificent goal of worldwide kosen-rufu. With that strong conviction, please overcome every hardship with a joyful spirit and advance cheerfully with a bright smile.

Mr. Toda always said that our aim is to enable all people to attain the life state of Buddhahood, that is, to reveal their highest human potential. Doing so, he said, will also establish the foundation for world peace and bring true happiness to our planet.

There are many movements around the world with many different goals. But none has a goal as noble, or principles and practice for its realization as sound, as our movement for kosen-rufu.

Mr. Toda also said that we are comrades from time without beginning sharing a beautiful unity of purpose, who have emerged together from that wonderful eternal realm into this troubled saha world.

Note on terminology: The saha world is the world in which we live. Saha means "endurance." This world, where the historical Buddha Shakyamuni appeared, is so named because its inhabitants must endure suffering.

The aim of our movement for kosen-rufu is the happiness of all humanity in the Latter Day of the Law. We have been born in different places around the world, in the UK, France, Germany, the US, and Brazil, to carry out that mission.

You are all dealing with personal challenges, I am sure. But you have voluntarily chosen to be born into these circumstances. You are all courageous Bodhisattvas of the Earth, who in accord with your own vow and mission have risen to action to create peace and happiness wherever you live. Never forget your noble role and the significance of being born in this world.

Let us work together to protect our joyful, pure, and harmonious community of faith and expand the realm of happiness of the Mystic Law in today's world rife with suffering.

From a gongyo meeting commemorating the 58th anniversary of the Soka Gakkai's founding, November 18, 1988, Tokyo.
