Chapter 17: Making the Most of Each Day

Section 17.1: Leading Fulfilling Lives, Free of Regret

President Ikeda asserts: "The only way to lead a life free of regret is to make the most of each day. Today will never come again, so each day must be treasured, lived mindfully, with complete commitment. Each meeting may be my last encounter with that person. That's why I'm determined to give my all to encouraging the person right in front of me and to treasure each individual to the utmost."

To live each day bravely and with all one's might—this honest, persevering way of life is the essence of our practice of human revolution.

This chapter features selections from President Ikeda's guidance for making the most of each day, outlining from various perspectives, how to live our lives as practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism.

While strolling together with a group of young women's division representatives this morning, I discussed the subject of the best way to live.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "The purpose of the appearance in this world of Shakyamuni Buddha, the lord of teachings, lies in his behavior as a human being" (WND-1, 852).

"Our behavior as a human being"—what kind of behavior leads to a life of happiness and wisdom?

The Daishonin also teaches: "You must not spend your lives in vain and regret it for ten thousand years to come" (WND-1, 622).

He is saying that we must not waste this precious existence, that we must not live in such a way that we are left with eternal regret.

It is, therefore, important that we choose a life of lasting fulfillment over one of shallow self-indulgence.

No matter how fun-filled or entertaining your life may seem, without a sense of fulfillment, it cannot truly be called happy. A life without any real purpose, which only leaves you feeling empty, is an unhappy one.

It's also important that we choose self-improvement over pleasure. Those committed to self-improvement have depth. They are attractive. They have hope.

Likewise, we need to choose serious effort over resignation, to dare rather than retreat. Those who do so brim with energy and vitality.

Acting with compassion instead of arrogance, with courage rather than fear—in such behavior lies the essence of Buddhism.

In the same spirit, I call on you to choose progress over stagnation, unity over disharmony, joy over pessimism, action over indecision, optimism over despondency.

The Soka Gakkai is a gathering of champions dedicated to spreading the correct teaching of Buddhism. To stand up proudly for truth and justice, rather than cast our lot with those who propound false and misguided ideas, is the path taught by Nichiren Daishonin.

Let us always press forward steadily, come what may, choosing cheerfulness over gloom, encouragement over envy, enthusiasm over anger.

Let us live out our lives with unwavering confidence, demonstrating a spirit of tolerance, not authoritarianism, filled with hope instead of despair, taking action instead of complaining, and engaging in dialogue, not violence.

Those who fight against their own weaknesses and keep pressing forward resolutely—challenging themselves instead of giving up, and taking personal responsibility for victory instead of criticizing others—triumph in the end and attain happiness.

Moreover, the efforts we make now determine not just this existence but our past, present, and future.

From a speech at a Kansai Region representatives conference, Osaka, May 18, 1992.

Section 17.2: Examining the Causes and Effects That Exist in Our Lives in the Present

President Ikeda says that when we elevate our present state of life, past negative causes are transformed into positive causes. He says that we should not be held back by the past; that we can, in fact, transform even the past. Our efforts in human revolution always begin with challenging ourselves from this moment on.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "There can be no discontinuity between the three existences of past, present, and future" (WND-1, 386). The past, present, and future are not separate from one another, but continuous and connected through the law of cause and effect.

In "The Opening of the Eyes," Nichiren Daishonin cites a sutra passage that states: "If you want to understand the causes that existed in the past, look at the results as they are manifested in the present. And if you want to understand what results will be manifested in the future, look at the causes that exist in the present" (WND-1, 279).

Buddhism teaches that our life now, at this present moment, contains all causes from the past and all the results or effects that will manifest in the future. This simultaneity of cause and effect means that eternity is encapsulated in the present moment. The teaching of the Mystic Law, the reality of three thousand realms in a single moment of life, clearly elucidates this wondrous law of life and the universe.

Note on terminology: Three thousand realms in a single moment of life is a philosophical system established by the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai of China based on the Lotus Sutra. The "three thousand realms" indicates the varying aspects that life assumes at each moment. At each moment, life manifests one of the Ten Worlds. Each of these worlds possesses the potential for all ten within itself, thus making one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred worlds possesses the ten factors and operates within each of the three realms of existence, thus making three thousand realms. In other words, all phenomena are contained within a single moment of life, and a single moment of life permeates the three thousand realms of existence, or the entire phenomenal world.

The Buddha is called the "Thus Come One," a term referring to the dynamic activity of life pulsing with wisdom at each moment.

That's why the present moment is what matters, not some time in the future. We need to strive earnestly in faith, deepening our commitment to our Buddhist practice and transforming our karma, right here and now. This is the way to accumulate the causes for happiness, which also contain the effect or result of happiness.

Please be absolutely assured that you have made wondrous causes in the past to be able to work together for worldwide kosen-rufu at this time, and are certain to enjoy marvelous future benefit as a result of your present efforts.

From a speech at an SGI general meeting, Tokyo, November 14, 1992.

Section 17.3: "Now Is the Last Moment of One's Life"

In "The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life," Nichiren Daishonin writes: "For one who summons up one's faith and chants Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with the profound insight that now is the last moment of one's life, the sutra [Lotus Sutra] proclaims: 'When the lives of these persons come to an end, they will be received into the hands of a thousand Buddhas, who will free them from all fear and keep them from falling into the evil paths of existence' [LSOC28, 363]" (WND-1, 216). Based on this passage, President Ikeda discusses the ultimate spirit of faith.

"With the profound insight that now is the last moment of one's life" (WND-1, 216) doesn't simply mean being ready or resolved. "With profound insight" means recognizing and fully comprehending that this is the real nature of life.

We all think that we have plenty of time left in our lives. But none of us knows when death may overtake us. We may die in the next instant. That is the true reality of life.

Even if we were to be guaranteed another 20, 30, or even 50 years of life, such time spans are, in the context of eternity, no more than fleeting moments. This is another sense of the insight that "now is the last moment of one's life" (WND-1, 216).

Any thoughtful person, having understood this, cannot help feeling the profound significance of being alive now and practicing Nichiren Buddhism. Such things as worldly power, fame, and riches are irrelevant. To accumulate good fortune that will not perish with death and for the sake of the eternal future, we cannot but focus on the true purpose of life while exerting ourselves wholeheartedly in our Buddhist practice.

This is the ultimate spirit of faith. Even so, as Buddhists and as members of human society, we are not meant to literally renounce or sacrifice everything of this world. Rather, when we exert ourselves earnestly in faith and practice with the great objective of kosen-rufu, everything in our lives is put to good use based on the Mystic Law. That is the essence of our commitment to live with the awareness that "now is the last moment of one's life."

When we live each moment of our life with this commitment, we "will be received into the hands of a thousand Buddhas, who will free [us] from all fear and keep [us] from falling into the evil paths of existence" (LSOC28, 363). That means that we attain a state of complete security and never fall into the evil paths of existence—namely, the worlds of hell, hungry spirits, animals, and asuras.

Note on terminology: The worlds of hell, hungry spirits, animals, and asuras are known together as the four evil paths. Considered the lowest four of the Ten Worlds, they are called evil because they are characterized by suffering.

On a superficial level, the passage "When the lives of these persons come to an end, they will be received into the hands of a thousand Buddhas" (LSOC28, 363) seems to suggest that this takes place at the moment of death, but on a more profound level, "come to an end" refers to each successive moment in life. In that sense, it is describing a state that we can actually attain while still alive.

The phrase "now is the last moment of one's life" urges us to put our entire being into the present moment. It means living each day wholeheartedly. It means to strive our hardest and give our all to achieve kosen-rufu and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Even when it comes to sharing Buddhism with someone, if you allow the present opportunity to slip by, you never know if you will ever have another chance to talk to that person at length. Also, if you interact with people in earnest, based on the awareness that this is your only chance to help them transform their karma, you are already living with the spirit that "now is the last moment of one's life."

Whether you are chanting to the Gohonzon, engaged in Buddhist study, or writing words of encouragement to your friends and fellow members—the crucial thing is to devote yourself to that activity fully and wholly each moment.

Upon reflection, life is nothing more than the accumulation of each present moment. If you are unable to make today fulfilling, you won't reap any positive results tomorrow. You can make the grandest long-term plans, but if you can't treasure each moment, those plans will just end as empty pipe dreams. Past causes and future results are all encapsulated in the true aspect of all phenomena in the present moment, and a transformation in that single moment of life can both extinguish karmic impediments from the distant past and ensure good fortune that will continue into the eternal future.

Note on terminology: True aspect of all phenomena refers to the ultimate truth or reality that permeates all phenomena and is in no way separate from them. Through the explanation of the ten factors, the "Expedient Means" (2nd) chapter of the Lotus Sutra teaches that all people are inherently endowed with the potential to become Buddhas, and clarifies the truth that they can tap and manifest this potential.

This important passage from the Daishonin's writings teaches the principle for changing our karma, the key to which lies in establishing solid faith based on the insight that "now is the last moment of one's life."

From a lecture on "The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, April 1977.

Section 17.4: Every Day Is "Time without Beginning"

In The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, President Ikeda touches on the concept of "time without beginning," stressing the importance of faith based on the true cause—the spirit of always starting afresh from this moment on.

"Time without beginning" is synonymous with "life without beginning or end." It refers not to the dimension of time but to the innermost truth of life—indeed, to life itself—which continues its activity without beginning or end.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin states: "Kuon [time without beginning] means something that was not worked for, that was not improved upon, but that exists just as it always has" (OTT, 141).

"Not worked for" means something that did not come about at a certain time but is inherent. "Not improved upon" means the state of ordinary beings, unadorned by the "thirty-two features and eighty characteristics" that are the special marks of a Buddha.

Note on terminology: Thirty-two features and eighty characteristics are extraordinary features attributed to Buddhas and bodhisattvas. In most cases, the term "thirty-two features and eighty characteristics" refers to the distinguishing qualities of a Buddha.

Inherent and eternal, and "existing just as it always has" (cf. OTT, 141)—this is time without beginning. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and the Gohonzon are also of time without beginning. Therefore, each moment we chant to the Gohonzon is time without beginning.

For us, every day in our lives is time without beginning. We are able to make our beings brim with the boundless life force of time without beginning. Every day, we make a fresh departure from the starting point of life—time without beginning.

That's why the present moment is the most important. We mustn't dwell on the past. There is no need to. To put all our energy into the present moment, with great hope for the future—that is the mark of a person who is wise in the way of living.

This moment is time without beginning. Everything starts from now.

The past no longer exists. The future isn't here yet. All that exists is this present moment. And in a flash, the present becomes the past. It both exists and doesn't exist. It is empty, or ku, the state of non-substantiality. In this state, life continues, moment to moment. It exists nowhere aside from the moment. We experience happiness and unhappiness only in the moment.

To regard our life in this present moment as the result of past causes is to view things from the standpoint of the "true effect"—that happened, followed by that, creating the present result. But to have that perspective alone does not engender hope. Instead, we should regard this present moment of life as the cause for manifesting a future effect. That cause is the "true cause" penetrating the innermost depths of one's life. It is not a superficial or outward cause.

The true cause sinks its roots deeply into one's life of time without beginning and, at the same time, pervades the entire Dharma realm. It is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the great law that sets everything in the universe into motion, the boundless eternal life force that causes all things to emerge and develop. Therefore, each moment that we believe in the Gohonzon, chant the Mystic Law, and engage in Buddhist practice is itself time without beginning.

The pure, boundless life force of time without beginning—"that was not worked for, that was not improved upon, but that exists just as it always has"—wells up within us. We can savor complete freedom in the present and the future. Nichiren Buddhism is the Buddhism of hope.

Faith in the Mystic Law is a source of infinite hope. No matter how adverse your present circumstances may be, even if it seems you have been defeated, it's important that you stand up with strong resolve to turn your situation around and demonstrate the limitless transformative potential of the Mystic Law. This is the essence of faith.

Only with all-out effort, with the determination to create something from nothing, can we understand genuine faith. The intense, arduous struggle of creating value—turning loss into benefit, evil into good, baseness into beauty—is the Soka Gakkai spirit and the essence of our practice of Nichiren Buddhism.

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, vols. 5 and 6, published in Japanese in September 1999 and August 2000.

Section 17.5: How We Start the Day Is the Key to Victory in Life

Sharing his personal experience, President Ikeda stresses the importance of making a good start to the day and maintaining a regular lifestyle so as to get the most out of each day and lead a victorious life.

For the sake of the growth and future success of our young men and women, I would like to impart the message that getting the day off to a good start is the key to victory in life.

In 1973, I visited the United Kingdom and engaged in an extended dialogue with the renowned British historian Arnold J. Toynbee. Professor Toynbee was 84 at the time. Yet even at that advanced age, with his motto Laboremus (Latin for "Let's get to work!"), he energetically continued to apply himself to his scholarly research day after day.

I still clearly remember his words on that subject. He said that he kept regular hours, awaking every morning at 6:45. After preparing breakfast for himself and his wife and making his bed, he would start working at 9:00. In this simple description of his morning routine, I sensed his youthful spirit to treasure each day and keep learning and improving. His example also left me deeply impressed that truly outstanding individuals, no matter what their age or circumstances, remain tirelessly committed to the pursuit of learning and self-development.

At the same time, Professor Toynbee's words reminded me that a good start in the morning and a regular lifestyle are indispensable to making each day productive and fulfilling. Those who go on to achieve eminence invariably value these important basics.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin states:

"Now Nichiren and his followers, who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, are persons who 'lodge in the same place as the Thus Come One [the Buddha].' Therefore, Fu Ta-shih [a venerated lay Buddhist in China] says in his commentary, 'Morning after morning we rise up with the Buddha, evening after evening we lie down with the Buddha.'" (OTT, 83)

As disciples of Nichiren Daishonin, we chant and practice the Mystic Law, day after day. As such, each one of us rises and rests together with the Buddha [that is, the Gohonzon].

First, our practice of morning and evening gongyo is the foundation for advancing on the correct path of life—a path aligned with the Law that pervades the three existences of past, present, and future—leading the most meaningful existence. Especially important, as the phrase "morning after morning we rise up with the Buddha" indicates, is doing an invigorating morning gongyo.

Failing to win in the morning can lead to an unsatisfactory day. And an unending succession of such days can add up to an unsatisfying life. On the other hand, winning in the morning, getting off to a good start, leads to a productive day and puts you on a path to solid progress, ultimately culminating in a life of fulfillment and victory.

That's why it's so important to win in the morning and get the day off to a refreshing start. This is something young people, especially, should challenge, for it is a source of victory and growth in all spheres.

Mr. Toda was very strict about getting to work on time. And as a businessman of exceptional talent, he was keenly aware of the importance of a well-disciplined life. I fondly remember his many comments regarding work. He said that a workplace where everyone brims with a fresh and vibrant spirit and resolve at the start of the work day is sure to grow. And he always insisted that the top person in the workplace should be the first to arrive, instilling in their coworkers a sense of responsibility and enthusiasm about their jobs. Doing so, he said, would also ensure the success of the work they were doing and of the business as a whole. When those in positions of responsibility are late to work and many lower-level employees grow equally lax about coming into work on time, he warned, the business will have problems and eventually decline.

These strict yet spot-on observations are the result of Mr. Toda's many years of firsthand business experience.

Mr. Toda himself was never late. He always came into the office, except when away on a business trip or some other special circumstance. Because of that, we, his employees, could never be late, either. Each morning was like a battle as I struggled frantically to make it to work on time. Sometimes, I even secretly wished that he'd be late. But that wish was always in vain!

Those days were really hard, but today I am deeply grateful for the valuable training they provided me.

I worked for Mr. Toda for about 10 years, doing everything I could to support and assist him. During that time, I was late for work two or three times for health reasons.

In those early years of our movement, Soka Gakkai meetings often went much later into the night than they do now and we often got home very late as a result. But Mr. Toda never accepted Soka Gakkai activities as an excuse for being late for work. He dismissed that as abusing one's faith.

He also insisted that the higher one's position in the organization, the greater one's responsibility, and the more important it is to set an example. He also sternly warned against leaders talking big but failing to follow up with concrete action, decrying it as a disgrace and inexcusable self-indulgence.

It's important for leaders to first be exemplary models for others, winning in the morning and getting each day off to a refreshing start.

Faith is manifested in daily life, and Buddhism finds expression in society. It would be truly regrettable if, though one practices Buddhism, one kept chaotic hours and it had a negative impact on one's workplace. Such an example would likely cause people to question the validity of Nichiren Buddhism.

Each of us must strive to demonstrate the greatness of Nichiren Buddhism in society and win trust and understanding from those around us. We must set an example, so those who know us will say: "People who practice that Buddhism are really different from others. They are outstanding." Those who win the unshakable trust of the people around them may be called genuine practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism.

Mr. Toda also said: "Being late for work is a sign that something is amiss in our Buddhist practice. Constantly making excuses will lead to lying and deviousness, and you will destroy people's faith in you. The next thing you know, you'll take a serious misstep, and you'll end up quitting your practice altogether."

Small things matter. Right or wrong, small things accumulate and lead to a major difference in the results. That's why the best way to achieve your important future goals is to pay careful attention to your minor daily challenges, and triumph in each one of them.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "If a person cannot manage to cross a moat ten feet wide, how can he cross one that is a hundred or two hundred feet?" (WND-1, 766). Small challenges, small successes, repeated again and again, become great victories and flower into a life of glorious success.

From a speech at a Chubu Region leaders meeting, Aichi, March 28, 1988.

Section 17.7: "One Day of Life Is More Valuable Than All the Treasures of the Major World System"

President Ikeda's motto is living each day to the fullest. Each day of life is incredibly precious. Here, he calls on us to make each day shine with the immeasurable value of life.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "One day of life is more valuable than all the treasures of the major world system" (WND-1, 955).

He says a single day of life is more precious than even the vastest collection of jewels. Today is important. I have made it my practice to value each day and dedicate my life to serving our members. This is my credo.

The Daishonin further states: "You have encountered the Lotus Sutra [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo]. If you live even one day longer, you can accumulate that much more benefit. How truly precious your life is!" (WND-1, 955).

Your lives are precious and endowed with a profound mission. Though you may appear the same as others striving in society, your days spent working for kosen-rufu as Soka Gakkai members are all incomparably noble and everlasting in terms of time based on the eternity of life.

I hope you will strive to live each day to the fullest so that you can say that today was enjoyable, victorious, fulfilling, and free of regrets.

From a speech at a nationwide men's division leaders meeting, Tokyo, October 10, 1992.
