Chapter 25: The Unity of "Many in Body, One in Mind"

Section 25.2: What Is the Meaning of "Many in Body, One in Mind"?

Discussing the significance of the terms "many in body" and "one in mind," President Ikeda notes that the unity of "many in body, one in mind" is the key to kosen-rufu, and that the Soka Gakkai exemplifies this principle in today's world.

The term "many in body" - which can also be translated as "different in body" - means that we each have our own unique personalities, talents, roles to play, and so on. In a general sense, "one in mind" - or "one in heart" - means sharing a common goal or common values. More specifically, in Nichiren Buddhism, it means sharing faith in the Mystic Law and the great vow for kosen-rufu.

The unity of "many in body, one in mind" in Buddhism refers to the individual and the group harmonizing based on the Law. It indicates a richly diverse and dynamic community of capable individuals who inspire one another in their efforts to advance kosen-rufu.

In his writings, the Daishonin stresses this unity of purpose, first of all, as the key to achieving success and victory in all endeavors. Second, he stresses it as absolutely vital in achieving kosen-rufu in the Latter Day of the Law, which is a struggle between the Buddha and devilish functions. He also expresses his firm conviction that as long as he and his disciples are solidly united in their commitment for kosen-rufu, they will be able to triumph over even the most formidable obstacles.

The spirit of "many in body, one in mind," in a sense, represents the ultimate manifestation of the "strategy of the Lotus Sutra" (WND-1, 1001), which is chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo to the Gohonzon - specifically, chanting with a shared commitment for kosen-rufu.

Kosen-rufu will not advance, even with the best-laid plans or strategies, without such united prayer. Strong prayer based on unity will also give rise to tremendous momentum. So even if individuals who seek to disrupt the unity of our movement should appear, their negative influence will be rebuffed by everyone's focused resolve.

When we advance in the united spirit of "many in body, one in mind" based on chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the realization of kosen-rufu, we generate a powerful forward impetus and the energy to secure victory. Everyone who shares in this spirit will be able to work together harmoniously and feel joy even in the midst of difficult struggles. Unity of purpose holds the key to creating such a rhythm of victory, a rhythm of dynamic activity.

My dearest wish now is that the youth who are our successors will fully inherit this noble rhythm of victory driven by the unity of "many in body, one in mind." Toward that end, I would like to affirm the meaning of a number of points regarding the concept of "one in mind," or unity of purpose, which is the key to victory.

First, "one in mind" refers to the great desire or vow for kosen-rufu.

In the midst of the Atsuhara Persecution, the Daishonin wrote to his youthful disciple Nanjo Tokimitsu: "My wish is that all my disciples make a great vow" (WND-1, 1003). Note on terminology: The Atsuhara Persecution was a series of threats and acts of violence against followers of Nichiren Daishonin in Atsuhara Village in Fuji District, Suruga Province (present-day central Shizuoka Prefecture), starting in around 1275 and continuing until around 1283. In 1279, 20 farmer disciples were arrested on false charges. They were interrogated by Hei no Saemon-no-jo, the deputy chief of the Office of Military and Police Affairs, who demanded that they renounce their faith. However, not one of them yielded. Hei no Saemon-no-jo eventually had three of them executed.

This is none other than a passionate call to his followers to dedicate their lives to the cause of kosen-rufu.

The great vow to realize kosen-rufu is also the very heart of the mentor-disciple spirit shared by Mr. Makiguchi, Mr. Toda, and me, who have all inherited this vow directly from the Daishonin. All three of us have given ourselves to its actualization with tireless dedication and ungrudging effort. This is the essence of the spirit of "many in body, one in mind."

The second point is that this oneness of mind, or unity of purpose, must be built on genuine respect for our fellow practitioners.

The spirit of kosen-rufu taught in the Lotus Sutra rests on the profound belief that all people possess the Buddha nature and thus the potential to attain Buddhahood. A community of practitioners harmoniously united for the sake of kosen-rufu will naturally reflect this philosophy of the Lotus Sutra in spirit and action.

Bodhisattva Never Disparaging undertook the practice of bowing in reverence to all those he encountered, based on his belief that everyone has the Buddha nature and can attain enlightenment through faith in the Lotus Sutra. He thus bowed in respect even to those who did not uphold the sutra. Note on terminology: Bodhisattva Never Disparaging appears in "The Bodhisattva Never Disparaging" chapter of the Lotus Sutra. This bodhisattva - Shakyamuni in a previous lifetime - lived at the end of the Middle Day of the Law following the death of the Buddha Awesome Sound King. He would bow to everyone he met and say: "I have profound reverence for you, I would never dare treat you with disparagement or arrogance. Why? Because you will all practice the bodhisattva way and will then be able to attain Buddhahood" (LSOC20, 308). However, he was attacked by arrogant monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen, who beat him with sticks and staves and threw stones at him. The sutra explains that this practice became the cause for Bodhisattva Never Disparaging to attain Buddhahood.

It goes without saying that our fellow members who embrace the Gohonzon and strive for kosen-rufu will all definitely attain Buddhahood. We should therefore accord them the utmost respect. As the "Encouragements of the Bodhisattva Universal Worthy" chapter of the Lotus Sutra says regarding those who accept and uphold the sutra: "You should rise and greet him from afar, showing him the same respect you would a Buddha" (LSOC28, 365).

The unity of "many in body, one in mind" symbolizes a bond based on the Buddhist philosophy of respect for all people. "One in mind," therefore, implies a spirit of mutual respect among fellow practitioners.

Third, "one in mind" simply means faith grounded in the oneness or shared commitment of mentor and disciple. The essence of "many in body, one in mind" is found in such faith, the ongoing pursuit of aligning our hearts with the great vow for kosen-rufu, which is the heart of the Buddha and the heart of genuine leaders of kosen-rufu.

Nikko Shonin, the Daishonin's disciple and successor, remained true to his mentor's spirit throughout his life, and built a harmonious community of practitioners directly connected to the Daishonin. In contrast, the other five senior priests, fearing government persecution and forgetting their vow as disciples, strayed from the correct path of kosen-rufu. Note on terminology: Five of the six senior priests designated by Nichiren Daishonin as his principal disciples betrayed his teachings after his death. Nikko Shonin was the only one among these original six senior disciples to correctly carry on the Daishonin's Buddhism. Turning against one's mentor is the epitome of disunity - of being of different minds, or at cross purposes.

As long as the fundamental spirit of striving for kosen-rufu demonstrated by the first three presidents pulses throughout the organization and solidly unites it, the Soka Gakkai will forever possess the great life force of the Buddha, who seeks to lead all people to enlightenment.

Endowed with this power of the Buddha, the Soka Gakkai towers as a community of practitioners solidly united in purpose, a great and indestructible bastion of the shared commitment of mentor and disciple that will defeat even the fiercest onslaughts of the three obstacles and four devils. Note on terminology: The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are the obstacle of earthly desires, the obstacle of karma, and the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are the hindrance of the five components, the hindrance of earthly desires, the hindrance of death, and the hindrance of the devil king.

Mr. Toda predicted that in the Buddhist scriptures of the future, the Soka Gakkai's name would be recorded as "Soka Gakkai Buddha." The Soka Gakkai, the unified gathering directly connected to the Daishonin and working to make kosen-rufu a reality, is itself a Buddha. This was my mentor's unshakable conviction.

He also often said: "The Soka Gakkai organization is more precious than my own life." I have sought to protect and nurture this harmonious community of practitioners, which is carrying out the Buddha's intent, as if it were Mr. Toda's life itself. Making the unity of "many in body, one in mind" the organization's guiding credo, I have done my very best to develop the Soka Gakkai and advance kosen-rufu.

Please continue your steady efforts in faith and sincere actions to create unity in diversity - "many in body, one in mind." In this way, I hope you will further expand our harmonious community of practitioners, which was built by the first three presidents through the shared commitment of mentor and disciple. For this itself is the path of kosen-rufu and is a sure step toward world peace.

From Lecture on "The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life," published in Japanese in February 2008.

Section 25.3: Showing One Another the Same Respect As We Would a Buddha

President Ikeda explains why unity is so important and stresses the need to respect one another as Buddhas and harmoniously work together in the organization dedicated to kosen-rufu, based on our noble shared purpose.

Nichiren Daishonin uses the term "many in body, one in mind" to express unity in which the individuality of each person is valued and given full play. "Many in body, one in mind" is indeed the supreme organizational principle that cherishes each person and enables them to develop their potential to the fullest.

"Many in body" reflects the understanding that each of us has a unique mission, talent, and set of circumstances.

"One in mind" means that, while fully expressing our individuality, we need to be united in spirit.

In contrast, "many in body, different in mind" is a situation of utter disunity.

"One in body, one in mind," meanwhile, describes a condition in which group thinking prevails, individuality is ignored, and totalitarianism ultimately results. People are unable to express their unique abilities.

Everyone, without exception, has a mission. Each person has enormous potential. How do we enable each person to realize that potential? When one person carries out their human revolution, it gives others courage and hope. It gives them confidence. Inspiration gives rise to inspiration, setting off a chain reaction that generates tremendous energy for change.

The Daishonin always encouraged his followers to be on good terms and to support one another.

Reading the postscript to "The Votary of the Lotus Sutra Will Meet Persecution" (WND-1, 449), it seems that the Daishonin's followers must have gathered regularly to read his letters. They must have studied his teachings and discussed the meaning of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime and how to advance kosen-rufu. These gatherings were no doubt similar to our Soka Gakkai discussion and planning meetings today.

Buddhist practice is not something we can carry out on our own. For, as the Daishonin says, "The winds of fame and profit blow violently, and the lamp of Buddhist practice is easily extinguished" (WND-1, 1027). It is vital that we encourage and support one another as we make our way forward. We need to be positive influences, or "good friends," to each other.

Buddhist practice is a constant battle against obstacles and devilish forces. We must continue practicing Buddhism amid a world rife with negative influences.

Today, we are pursuing our Buddhist practice as ordinary people in the midst of our daily lives, making our humanity shine brightly, unperturbed by the negative influences all around us. In doing so, we are like the lotus flower described in the Lotus Sutra, which blooms unsullied by the muddy water in which it grows (cf. LSOC15, 263). There is no other way than this to attain Buddhahood. That's why being part of a gathering of good friends is invaluable to successfully carrying out our Buddhist practice.

Being united in a lofty shared objective is crucial. The precious organization of kosen-rufu absolutely must not be destroyed. Construction requires tenacious and painstaking effort, while destruction takes but an instant.

A good example of the importance of unity can be seen in the struggles of the Ikegami brothers, Munenaka and Munenaga. It is well known how their father, Yasumitsu, had disowned the elder Munenaka for practicing the Daishonin's teachings, and how his actions had been instigated by the priest Ryokan of Gokuraku-ji temple. Note on terminology: Ryokan, also known as Ninsho, was a priest of the True Word Precepts school in Japan. With the patronage of the Hojo clan, Ryokan became chief priest of Gokuraku-ji temple in Kamakura. He ingratiated himself with government officials, gaining important and lucrative positions. He was hostile to the Daishonin and actively conspired with the authorities to have the Daishonin and his followers persecuted.

Having disowned his elder son, Yasumitsu began taking steps to have his younger son Munenaga succeed him as head of the household. Munenaga became troubled over whether he should accept his father's proposal or choose the way of faith. In the end, after receiving encouragement from the Daishonin, he acted in concert with his elder brother.

The Daishonin clearly discerned that unity was the key to the Ikegami brothers overcoming their challenge. He taught them that they could defeat the devilish functions by joining together, along with their wives, to present a united front. In his writing "Letter to the Brothers," the Daishonin urges them to forge strong unity.

In any gathering of people, there will always be those we like and get along well with, and those whom we don't particularly like and aren't so friendly with. In a sense, it is only natural that we should have such emotions as human beings, so we really need not worry about them. At the same time, however, it is foolish to be swayed by personal likes and dislikes and allow ourselves to slacken in our Buddhist practice as a result. Doing so only provides an opening for devilish functions, causing us to fall prey to those negative forces.

That is why the Daishonin strictly warned his followers against speaking ill of one another. He writes: "However disagreeable it may be to you, you should associate with them amicably" (WND-1, 850); "Even if they have their faults, if they are only minor ones, just pretend you do not notice them" (WND-2, 731); and "You must be on good terms with those who believe in this teaching, neither seeing, hearing, nor pointing out anything about them that may displease you" (WND-1, 907).

We are all Buddhas. Therefore, to criticize another is to do the same to a Buddha. Because we are all Buddhas, we should respect one another. It is important that the Soka Gakkai brim with the spirit described in the passage "You should rise and greet him from afar, showing him the same respect you would a Buddha" (LSOC28, 365).

The Daishonin goes so far as to say that when people get into the habit of criticizing others, "they never rid themselves of this wrong attitude, so they seem to be destined for the evil paths" (WND-1, 757). Therefore, he says: "You should respect one another [as Buddhas]" (Ibid.). He also asserts that we should be on good terms with one another, just like Shakyamuni and Many Treasures, who in the "Treasure Tower" chapter of the Lotus Sutra share a seat.

The important thing is faith directed toward realizing kosen-rufu. If we are striving wholeheartedly for kosen-rufu, we will have no time to quarrel. The Daishonin repeatedly admonishes against the folly of fellow practitioners squabbling with each other in front of the enemy. He compared such behavior to the "snipe and the shellfish," who were both caught by the fisherman because they were preoccupied with arguing among themselves (cf. WND-2, 914). We should talk and discuss things openly with one another based on a shared commitment for kosen-rufu.

In any situation, dialogue is positive. It builds solidarity and creates unity. To reject dialogue is wrong; it can be divisive and destructive. The point is to meet and to talk. It is only natural that our perspectives may differ from others. But discussion gives rise to trust, even among those who don't see eye to eye. In society as well, dialogue is the foundation for peace, while rejection of dialogue is the gateway to conflict and war.

The Daishonin always urged his followers to engage in dialogue and develop the unity of "many in body, one in mind." He writes: "Even a stranger, if you open up your heart to him, may be willing to lay down his life for you" (WND-1, 444); and "Be sure to urge all those in Suruga [home to the Atsuhara area] to remain united in their faith!" (WND-2, 572). There are indeed many such statements in the Daishonin's writings.

He also said: "You should always talk with each other to free yourselves from the sufferings of birth and death and attain the pure land of Eagle Peak, where you will nod to each other and speak in one mind" (WND-1, 909).

After all, the bonds between comrades in faith who have worked together to advance kosen-rufu are eternal. There may be times when you think: "One lifetime with that person is enough for me!" But the important thing is that we work with such people toward fundamentally transforming our state of life. As the Daishonin says: "You have associated with a friend in the orchid room and have become as straight as mugwort growing among hemp" (WND-1, 23). Note on terminology: "A friend in the orchid room" indicates a person of virtue. The implication is that the company of a virtuous person works as a good influence, just as one is imbued with fragrance on entering a room filled with orchids. It is said that mugwort supported by hemp plants grows upright.

People can change. And if we didn't change for the better, what would be the point of our Buddhist practice? The Daishonin also writes: "The dove has changed into a hawk, the sparrow into a clam" (Ibid.). These are expressions taken from early Chinese literature that indicate dramatic change.

As fellow members who uphold the Mystic Law, it's essential that we respect one another. We need to encourage one another as we advance together on the long and difficult road of kosen-rufu. We need to advance with the unity of "many in body, one in mind," always acting as good friends to one another.

From The World of Nichiren Daishonin's Writings, volume 1, published in Japanese in June 2003.

Section 25.4: Unity That Embraces Diversity

In a discussion with young people, President Ikeda clarifies the essential meaning of "many in body, one in mind."

Nichiren Daishonin taught his disciples to proceed in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind." This was his clear guidance. Acting in accord with the Daishonin's teachings is the mark of a true practitioner.

In modern terms, "many in body, one in mind" means an organization. "Many in body" means that each person is different - that people differ in their appearances, positions, circumstances, and individual missions. But their hearts - their spirit in faith - should be one; each person should be "one in mind," united in spirit.

In contrast, if a group of people are "many in body, different in mind," there is no unity of purpose. Likewise, if they are "one in body, one in mind," it means they have been coerced into uniformity and compelled to think, look, and act alike. This is akin to fascism, where people have no freedom, and it ultimately leads only to a state where people are "one in body, different in mind" - a situation where people give the appearance of being united and committed to the same goal on the surface but, in reality, don't accept that goal in their hearts.

"Many in body" means that each person gives full play to their unique potential and individuality. "One in mind" means that everyone works together based on faith, sharing the same goal and purpose. This is true unity.

One can liken the unity of "many in body, one in mind" to a bamboo grove. Each bamboo stalk sprouts up independently, yet underground, their roots are intertwined. The world of faith is the same. Because we share the same "roots," because we share a common spirit and purpose, each one of us can grow limitlessly, reaching for the sky in our personal development and achievements.

True unity is achieved when we each have the strength to stand alone - the conviction and fortitude to advance, even if we are the only one. It's not just passively depending on the support of others or finding strength in numbers.

From Discussions on Youth, published in Japanese in March 1999.

Section 25.5: The Treasure of Harmonious Unity

A wonderful quality of the Soka Gakkai, President Ikeda notes, is that its members work together in beautiful harmony.

It is beautiful when people can get along and work well together. Buddhism is a teaching of cooperation and harmony. This spirit is articulated as "many in body, one in mind," and is the Soka Gakkai's foremost treasure.

To talk behind others' backs, to gripe and complain, and to plot and scheme - such behavior points to selfishness and ego. It points to prejudice and narrow-mindedness, and it leads to the gravest of offenses in Buddhism - that of disrupting the harmonious community of practitioners.

I hope that, should a problem or disagreement arise, the parties involved will talk about it directly until they resolve it to everyone's satisfaction. The ideal path of a harmonious Buddhist organization is to advance together, always wisely and always based on faith.

I would ask our men's and young men's division members to be courteous and polite when talking to our women's and young women's division members. Please never raise your voice or speak in a haughty, condescending, or arrogant manner. You have no right to do so. Men and women are equal. The Daishonin states: "There should be no discrimination between men and women" (cf. WND-1, 385). I hope that you will always be gentlemen who respect and value women. That is a tradition of the Soka Gakkai.

Similarly, it is important for all leaders to warmly thank members for their efforts and hard work. Simple expressions of thoughtfulness and concern - "Thank you," "Please take care," "Don't catch cold" - warm people's hearts and spread a lovely, refreshing spirit of humanity throughout our organization. The Soka Gakkai is a realm of beautiful human ties.

An organization pervaded by a spirit of warmth, of sincere faith, of concern for fellow members, of unity, and of devotion to kosen-rufu, an organization whose members' hearts are united in faith - this is the Soka Gakkai. Let us always maintain this tradition.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, July 18, 2000.

Section 25.6: Unity of Purpose Is the Key to Achieving Our Goals

Unity of purpose is crucial in achieving anything worthwhile. President Ikeda emphasizes that it is especially important for leaders to respect their fellow members and work harmoniously with them. This, he says, will not only pave the way to kosen-rufu but allow everyone to enjoy lives filled with benefit and good fortune.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "People can definitely attain their goal, if they are of one mind" (WND-1, 618).

Numbers are not the key to achieving goals, nor are titles or organizational positions. It all comes down to whether everyone can unite in purpose. Such unity provides a solid core for building a sound future.

Inability to achieve goals reflects an absence of the spirit of "many in body, one in mind." This can be seen in leaders who think they're all-important, that everything hinges on them, and who self-centeredly push ahead without conferring with and winning the agreement of others. Such an attitude can lead them to exploit the organization for their own personal gain - a behavior that is completely unacceptable in the realm of the Mystic Law.

It is crucial for our men's, women's, and youth division members to strive together in a spirit of mutual respect and trust. Young people have their own special qualities and strengths, and older members possess a rich fund of experience and wisdom.

Your SGI organizations in each country should hold executive conferences where, after everyone has had the opportunity to express their opinions and be heard, you decide on activities by consensus. Capricious, willful, autocratic behavior goes against the spirit of Buddhism.

The important thing is to get along and communicate well - that should be your guiding principle. Men's division members should never patronize women's division members or disregard the opinions of our youth division members. They should never emotionally reproach others merely because they feel their authority is questioned or their pride is wounded.

I hope you will always strive in a spirit of mutual respect and trust. Please be assured that when you warmly encourage one another and unite in one mind to work and advance together, you will build lives and ever-growing spheres of kosen-rufu that overflow with good fortune.

From a speech at an SGI general meeting, Tokyo, October 4, 1989.

Section 25.7: "One in Mind" Means Sharing an Unwavering Commitment in Faith

Citing the guidance of second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda, President Ikeda explains the profound meaning of "many in body, one in mind."

Mr. Toda said: "The 'mind' of 'many in body, one in mind' is not the ordinary mind, or heart. It is the mind of faith. 'One in mind' means being 'one in faith' - one in our commitment to this Buddhism and its practice. That's the real meaning of 'many in body, one in mind.' When young people have a strong mind of faith, a strong commitment to Buddhism, they will never be defeated."

"Many in body, one in mind" is not something as superficial as just getting along well together. The "mind" in question is the mind or spirit to believe wholeheartedly in the Gohonzon, to never stray from the example of Nichiren Daishonin's life, and to forge ahead tirelessly with our fellow practitioners to the very end. This unwavering faith is the "mind" of "many in body, one in mind." Because we share the same commitment in faith and the same objective of kosen-rufu, we are comrades in faith and united in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind."

If that oneness of mind is easily shaken or undermined whenever something happens, then it didn't really exist in the first place; you were never truly "one in mind" with other members. And that leads to defeat in life.

I hope you will take deeply to heart these words of Mr. Toda: "When young people have a strong mind of faith, a strong commitment to Buddhism, they will never be defeated."

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, December 4, 1987.

Section 25.8: Self-Reliant Faith Is the Foundation of Unity

President Ikeda explains that true unity of purpose is made possible by rejecting irresponsible dependency on others and striving and praying earnestly with self-reliant faith.

Buddhism is harmony, solidarity, the unity of "many in body, one in mind." Everyone is a supremely worthy Buddha, a Bodhisattva of the Earth with a profound mission. Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

That is why a spirit of mutual respect and of friendly support and assistance are so important. If we have this spirit, we are guaranteed to triumph both in life and in kosen-rufu. We will be absolutely unbeatable. In an environment of animosity and discord, everyone suffers. It is a state of misery, destructiveness, and hell.

Unity is strength. Unity is right. Unity is beautiful. Unity is enjoyable. Solid unity for kosen-rufu is always accompanied by the development of a more expansive state of life by each individual. This is because when we align our hearts with the development of kosen-rufu, we can break through the shell of our own selfish ego. When we have the spirit to advance together with the Soka Gakkai, together with our fellow members, together on the path of mentor and disciple dedicated to the cause of justice, we can climb the summit of our own great human revolution.

What is the key to unity? It may seem at first like a contradiction, but the key to unity is for each individual to be self-reliant. Each person must pray earnestly and become strong. As long as we think someone else will do it, we can never build true unity. Depending on others and irresponsibly letting things take their course is certain to result in no more than a weak and ineffectual mob.

"Youth, just one of you stand! A second and then a third will definitely follow!" In these words, President Toda revealed the formula for kosen-rufu.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, May 19, 2001.

Section 25.9: The Fundamental Spirit of the Soka Gakkai

President Ikeda stresses that the beautiful unity of "many in body, one in mind" is the unchanging rule for the development of kosen-rufu and reaffirms the eternal fundamental spirit of the Soka Gakkai, which he shared on the occasion of the SGI's founding.

Kosen-rufu is a long journey, extending into the distant future. There is no need to rush or be impatient. The important thing now is to foster capable individuals one by one and build an unshakable foundation.

That said, when we look at the development of kosen-rufu in various countries, one thing is clearly evident: those places where remarkable growth has been achieved are places where the leaders work together in harmony and unity. Nichiren Daishonin writes: "If the spirit of many in body but one in mind prevails among the people, they will achieve all their goals" (WND-1, 618).

From a certain perspective, Buddhism is the study of human nature and life. How should human beings behave? What results from their actions? Buddhist teachings are based on a keen and penetrating observation of humanity.

To achieve anything, we must have the united spirit of "many in body, one in mind." This is the unvarying rule of kosen-rufu. In contrast, the Daishonin warns that if we display the disunity of "many in body, different in mind," we would be "like warriors who destroy their own castle from within" (WND-1, 217).

There is a saying "The fish rots from the head." The higher your leadership positions, the more you must unite and work together. Those who have undergone suffering themselves can understand and empathize with the suffering of others. Those who have worked hard themselves can appreciate the value of others' hard work and effort.

We are now conducting our SGI activities bearing in mind such specific guidelines as maintaining a harmonious organization through discussion and consensus, valuing young people and fostering successors, and respecting the opinions of women while promoting unity among the four divisions (the men's, women's, young men's, and young women's divisions). Let us strengthen and deepen our efforts in this regard, for they exemplify the ideal organization that accords with the Daishonin's teaching of "many in body, one in mind."

In the realm of Buddhism, we are all equal, and we are all worthy of respect. We all have a mission, and we are all direct disciples of Nichiren Daishonin. It is extremely important, therefore, to create an atmosphere within our organization where we can all voice our opinions, be willing to listen to what others have to say, and discuss things freely. This is in fact the practice followed at the Soka Gakkai Headquarters.

When the SGI was established on Guam on January 26, 1975, I said to the assembled members: "Rather than seeking after your own praise or glory, I hope that you will dedicate your noble lives to sowing the seeds of peace of the Mystic Law throughout the entire world. I shall do the same." I have done as I promised that day, traveling the globe in my efforts for kosen-rufu, and you, too, have dedicated yourselves to your noble missions as Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

The seeds we planted have now sprouted and sent forth branches and bountiful leaves, and flowers of hope, happiness, and peace are beginning to bloom around the world.

From a speech at an SGI executive conference, Tokyo, November 15, 2002.

Section 25.10: The Power to Unite Humanity

President Ikeda notes that the unity of "many in body, one in mind" is not only the driving force for the development of kosen-rufu and our victory over all obstacles, but also the philosophy that can lead humanity to peace and harmonious coexistence.

The unity taught by Nichiren Daishonin is strong and noble beyond compare. Because the Daishonin's disciples had this unity of purpose, they were able to triumph in the midst of the Atsuhara Persecution.

For many years, the young Nikko Shonin, the Daishonin's direct disciple who later went on to become his true successor, had spearheaded the propagation efforts in Suruga Province (present-day central Shizuoka Prefecture), where Atsuhara was located. He directly conveyed the Daishonin's spirit to the believers there, mostly farmers, and instilled in them faith to strive in oneness with the Daishonin.

Moreover, Nikko Shonin forged strong, close-knit unity among the followers, based on a spirit of equality and mutual respect that transcended differences such as rank, status, and other social barriers. That's why he was able to build an unshakable community of practitioners who refused to give in to any persecution or hardship.

The deaths of the three martyrs of Atsuhara, who laid down their lives for their beliefs, signaled the establishment of a true, invincible Buddhism of the people. Note on terminology: The three martyrs of Atsuhara were three farmer disciples of Nichiren Daishonin - Jinshiro, Yagoro, and Yarokuro - who were arrested and beheaded during the Atsuhara Persecution.

Unity of purpose must be forged by genuine disciples who base themselves on the Daishonin's spirit and boldly take their place on the front lines of the struggle for kosen-rufu, just as Nikko Shonin demonstrated. The Soka Gakkai is an organization of people firmly united in purpose - an organization founded by Presidents Makiguchi and Toda for the sake of promoting kosen-rufu.

The Daishonin declares that the key to victory is "perfect unity" (WND-1, 618) - in other words, the unity of "many in body, one in mind." At the same time, victory attests to our solid unity of purpose. Everywhere around the globe, Soka Gakkai members are uniting harmoniously and winning widespread trust by contributing to society as good citizens and members of their communities.

Our goal is unity in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind," not "one in body, one in mind." Everyone has their own unique and precious individuality. We are all different in a myriad of ways - in our profession, age, gender, personality, and so forth.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin says that the cherry, plum, peach, and damson each embody the ultimate truth just as they are, without undergoing any change (cf. OTT, 200). Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching that enables each person to fully exhibit their unique characteristics.

Unity in diversity is born when we each work together for the unsurpassed goal of kosen-rufu while shining to the fullest in the place of our own mission. It is not something we create because we are told to. It's a self-motivated unity, an alliance of people striving to reveal their true brilliant potential.

What matters most is each person's happiness and victory in life. One person changing their karma, one person growing as a human being, is the basis for everything. The Daishonin writes: "When the pine flourishes, the cypress is overjoyed; when grasses whither, orchids weep. Even insentient plants and trees share as one a friend's joys and sorrows" (WND-2, 964). To rejoice in our friends' happiness, to sincerely applaud their achievements, to be by their side and encourage them when they are struggling, to share both good times and hard times and weather life's difficulties together - true unity is born of such warmhearted and humanistic ties.

Mr. Toda once explained unity very simply: "To say to another member 'Are you also facing difficulties? Are you struggling to make ends meet, too? Are you also suffering? Then, together let's strengthen our faith!' - this is what it means to be united in purpose."

The Daishonin taught his youthful disciple Nanjo Tokimitsu this passage from the Lotus Sutra: "We and other living beings all together [will] attain the Buddha way [LSOC7, 168]" (WND-1, 1003). We attain Buddhahood "all together." When we make the vow to strive in our Buddhist practice with others and to grow and achieve victory together, we naturally come to be solidly united in purpose.

In his famous writing "Many in Body, One in Mind," the Daishonin states:

"If the spirit of many in body but one in mind prevails among the people, they will achieve all their goals, whereas if one in body but different in mind, they can achieve nothing remarkable. . . . Although Nichiren and his followers are few, because they are different in body, but united in mind [i.e., many in body but one in mind], they will definitely accomplish their great mission of widely propagating the Lotus Sutra" (WND-1, 618).

The Daishonin says here that we cannot achieve victory if our minds are at cross purposes, no matter how large our group is or how great our influence. In contrast, even if our numbers are small, we will be able to accomplish all of our goals if we are united in our shared aspiration to realize kosen-rufu.

In response to a youth division member who asked: "Why does the kind of unity in diversity we find in the Soka Gakkai have the power to foster human harmony?"

First, because our members have a profound philosophy. Second, because they take consistent action. Third, because they possess unwavering courage.

Unity in diversity - or "many in body, one in mind" - is founded upon the philosophy of the Lotus Sutra, which teaches the equality of all human beings and the dignity of life.

In Nichiren Buddhism, there is no discrimination on the basis of race, ethnicity, class, gender, or any other differences. The Daishonin declares: "A single individual has been used as an example, but the same thing applies equally to all living beings" (WND-2, 844). And he states: "There should be no discrimination between men and women" (cf. WND-1, 385).

We are able to have unity of purpose because we unfailingly believe in the potential of all people to attain Buddhahood. Supreme harmony is created when everyone can shine their fullest through the power of the Mystic Law.

Why is the Soka Gakkai so strongly united? Because its members tirelessly engage in dialogue. They never let up. Whether it comes to organizational unity or harmony among all people, the basic principle is the same. It's important to keep making efforts again and again to reach out and talk with others, creating heart-to-heart bonds based not on social position or title, but on our shared humanity. It is through such continual, steadfast actions that genuine solidarity is born.

In our communities, too, our members have sincerely persisted in dialogue, undeterred by even the most daunting walls of distrust. This is why we have been able to spread the Mystic Law across the globe.

Buddhism requires unremitting effort. The Daishonin writes: "Strengthen your faith day by day and month after month. Should you slacken in your resolve even a bit, devils will take advantage" (WND-1, 997). Just as the Daishonin states, if we become complacent in our faith, devilish functions will take advantage. Devilish functions also seek to create division.

As we each challenge our individual human revolution and forge indestructible unity based on a shared vow for kosen-rufu, we can overcome all obstacles. We can achieve victories that are the concrete result of the unity of "many in body, one in mind."

Here, "mind" - also meaning "heart" - refers to the wish for kosen-rufu, the spirit to respect our fellow members, and the heart of a lion king - the ultimate expression of which is the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple.

In times of great challenges, we should chant powerful daimoku. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is like the roar of a lion king. In times of shared adversity, we should use our voices unsparingly to support and encourage our fellow members.

From Youth and the Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, published in Japanese in September 2012.
