Chapter 18: Buddhism Is a Teaching of Dialogue

Section 18.2: Engaging in Humanistic Dialogue

On his first visit to the Soka Young Women's Center (which opened in Shinanomachi, Tokyo, in May 2006), President Ikeda offered five eternal guidelines for the young women's division. In discussing the fourth guideline, "Engage in dialogue to foster friendship and humanistic ideals," he urged members to confidently talk with others about Buddhism.

Dialogue is extremely important in the realm of Nichiren Buddhism.

The Daishonin writes: "This saha world is a land in which one gains the way through the faculty of hearing" (WND-2, 87). Enabling people to hear about the Mystic Law and form a connection with Buddhism is carrying out the incredibly noble work of the Buddha. Your dialogues are the best possible way to expand our network of happiness and good.

Note on terminology: Saha world refers to this world, which is full of suffering. Often translated as the world of endurance. In Sanskrit, saha means the earth; it derives from a root meaning "to bear" or "to endure." For this reason, in the Chinese versions of Buddhist scriptures, saha is rendered as endurance. In this context, the saha world indicates a world in which people must endure suffering.

The Daishonin clearly states: "[Having] heard the Lotus Sutra, which leads to Buddhahood, with this as the seed, one will invariably become a Buddha" (WND-1, 882); and "One should by all means persist in preaching the Lotus Sutra and causing [others] to hear it" (WND-1, 882). We must not spare our voices in sharing with many others the supreme teaching [of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo]. Through such efforts, we help connect them to the Mystic Law, a cause for their eternal happiness. And we create a personal chronicle that brims with everlasting good fortune. As the Daishonin says: "Single-mindedly chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and urge others to do the same; that will remain as the only memory of your present life in this human world" (WND-1, 64).

In particular, we mustn't be afraid to speak to others about what we know to be right. The Daishonin instructs: "You must act and speak without the least servility" (WND-1, 824). The confidence to share the true greatness of the Mystic Law is the spirit of propagation in Nichiren Buddhism, the Soka Gakkai spirit, and the spirit of kosen-rufu. Our members' proud conviction made our organization what it is today.

Discussing the essence of dialogue, Mr. Toda said: "Sincerely sharing the truth with others and expressing what's in our hearts—these are the principles that gave birth to the Soka Gakkai and are the driving force of its development." He also said: "Important is humanistic dialogue that fosters genuine heart-to-heart communication, friendship, and understanding of different cultures."

In addition, he taught me: "Just launching into an abstract discussion of difficult Buddhist principles doesn't necessarily contribute to people's understanding of Buddhism. Sometimes it's better to take a more creative and flexible approach and spread the profound teachings of Nichiren Daishonin by expanding the scope of our discussion to literature, music, and art."

Cherishing my mentor's instructions, I have done my utmost to reach out to people in dialogue and transcend all barriers. Together with my wife, Kaneko, I have opened paths of dialogue and built bridges of friendship in countries and regions across the globe. This is a precious legacy that I bequeath to all of you. As philosophers of Soka, please engage in dialogue freely, joyfully, to your heart's content.

From a speech at a commemorative young women's division gathering, Tokyo, June 4, 2009.

Section 18.3: Buddhist Dialogue Shines with the Light of Human Revolution

President Ikeda teaches that talking to others about the Mystic Law means having deep respect for their lives, learning from them, and growing together. Our concern, prayers, and one-to-one dialogues for others' happiness, he says, are a shining reflection of our own human revolution.

It is through talking and interacting with others that we truly develop as human beings. Dialogue means learning from and respecting others, which makes heartfelt conversation possible. Learning from others enriches us. In such rich discussion, there is joy, happiness, and peace.

Dialogue is itself a sign of human triumph.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Now, . . . we have entered the Latter Day of the Law, and the daimoku that I, Nichiren, chant is different from that of earlier ages. This Nam-myoho-renge-kyo encompasses both practice for oneself and the teaching of others" (WND-2, 986).

This past year, chanting powerful daimoku, our youth division members have exerted themselves tirelessly and engaged in dialogue spurred by a wish for the welfare of their friends and communities.

Every day, I receive exciting reports of their personal victories: dialogues pursued for years finally producing results or someone's first success in having a friend start to practice Nichiren Buddhism. Such reports from young people who are challenging themselves give me immense hope. Nothing inspires or encourages everyone more than the fresh dynamism of youth. Young people are the ones who create the future.

Of course, sometimes a friend with whom you talk about Buddhism may react negatively or emotionally, or you may find it difficult to help someone gain an understanding of our movement. As the Daishonin writes, to share the Mystic Law is to practice just as the Buddha teaches. It is the most difficult of all undertakings. But we gain the same benefit from enabling someone to hear about the correct teaching whether or not they immediately take faith in it. In either case, we are carrying out the supremely noble work of the Buddha.

There is no need to worry or feel bad if you don't achieve the results you hoped for. I have experienced the same thing myself. Again and again, I have wondered how best to communicate my message and reach another person. Once a friend sent back all the letters I had written him out of my sincere wish for his welfare. I felt sad and frustrated at the time, but now it is a fond memory of my youth. As you go through life, you will no doubt more keenly appreciate these words of the Daishonin: "Single-mindedly chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and urge others to do the same; that will remain as the only memory of your present life in this human world" (WND-1, 64).

Each day you chant and take action this way is a day of wonderful self-development, enabling you to turn even severe challenges into sources of growth. Such efforts form a shining foundation of faith in the depths of your life.

Bodhisattva Never Disparaging bowed respectfully to everyone he met and greeted them to the effect: "I have profound reverence for you, because you will practice the bodhisattva way and be able to attain Buddhahood" (cf. LSOC20, 308). People responded to this with hostility, however. They showered him with curses and abuse and attacked him with sticks and stones.

Note on terminology: Bodhisattva Never Disparaging is described in the "Bodhisattva Never Disparaging" (20th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra. This bodhisattva—Shakyamuni in a previous lifetime—lived at the end of the Middle Day of the Law, after the death of the Buddha Awesome Sound King. He would bow to everyone he met and say: "I have profound reverence for you, I would never dare treat you with disparagement or arrogance. Why? Because you will all practice the bodhisattva way and will then be able to attain Buddhahood" (LSOC20, 308). However, he was attacked by arrogant people, who beat him with sticks and staves and threw stones at him. The sutra explains that this practice became the cause for Bodhisattva Never Disparaging to attain Buddhahood.

Respect met with antagonism—this shows how firmly rooted people's resistance can be to spiritual transformation that awakens the dormant Buddha nature deep in their lives. But even if we at first encounter resistance, sharing the greatness of the Mystic Law with others creates a connection that activates their Buddha nature. We have made a cause for their eventual attainment of Buddhahood. This is the principle of the poison-drum relationship.

Note on terminology: Poison-drum relationship, also called a reverse relationship, is a bond formed with the Lotus Sutra by opposing or slandering it. One who opposes the Lotus Sutra when it is preached will still form a relationship with it by virtue of opposition and will thereby attain Buddhahood eventually. A "poison drum" is a mythical drum daubed with poison; this is a reference to a statement in the Nirvana Sutra that once the poison drum is beaten, all those who hear it will die, even if they are not of the mind to listen to it. Similarly, when the correct teaching is preached, both those who embrace it and those who oppose it will equally receive the seeds of Buddhahood, and even those who oppose it will attain Buddhahood eventually. In this analogy, the "death" that results from hearing the correct teaching is the death of illusion or earthly desires. This metaphor is used to illustrate the benefit of even a reverse relationship with Buddhism.

Nothing is ever wasted in our efforts for kosen-rufu. Abandoning our actions to share the Mystic Law because someone's reaction disheartens us would be the very opposite of compassion. The Daishonin cites the Lotus Sutra passage: "The seeds of Buddhahood sprout through causation, and for this reason they preach the single vehicle [the Mystic Law]" (LSOC2, 75; cf. WND-1, 1117). The more we help others form a connection with Buddhism, the more we expand the scope of our movement for kosen-rufu. The spirit to sincerely care about others' happiness and well-being is the spirit of the Buddha. This spirit itself is a shining reflection of a great human revolution.

From an essay series "Our Brilliant Path to Victory," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, December 15, 2010.

Section 18.4: Sharing Buddhism Begins with Our Prayers for Others' Happiness

In a discussion on the practice of shakubuku stressed by Nichiren Daishonin in his writings, President Ikeda explains the essence of talking to others about Buddhism as Soka Gakkai members in contemporary times and the "benefit of rejoicing on hearing the Law," a concept described in the Lotus Sutra.

Note on terminology: Shakubuku is a method of expounding Buddhism by refuting another's attachment to erroneous teachings and thus leading that person to the correct teaching. The term "shakubuku" is used in contrast to "shoju," which means to lead another gradually to the correct teaching in accord with that person's capacity. These two kinds of practice are described in the Shrimala Sutra, T'ien-t'ai's Great Concentration and Insight, and other works. In Nichiren Buddhism, the term "shakubuku" is also often used synonymously with propagating or sharing the Mystic Law.

In "On Practicing the Buddha's teaching," Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Anyone who practices Buddhism should first understand the two types of practice—shoju and shakubuku. All the sutras and treatises fall into one or the other of these two categories. . . . In this age, the provisional teachings have turned into enemies of the true teaching. When the time is right to propagate the teaching of the one vehicle [the Lotus Sutra], the provisional teachings become enemies. When they are a source of confusion, they must be thoroughly refuted from the standpoint of the true teaching. Of the two types of practice, this is shakubuku, the practice of the Lotus Sutra. With good reason T'ien-t'ai stated, 'The Lotus Sutra is the teaching of shakubuku, the refutation of the provisional doctrines'" (WND-1, 394).

Shakubuku is sharing the truth. Because the Lotus Sutra teaches the truth, it is known as the "teaching of shakubuku." Now, in the Latter Day of the Law, all our efforts to communicate and spread the greatness of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the essence of the Lotus Sutra—constitute shakubuku.

Shakubuku doesn't mean picking fights with people. Telling others about the Mystic Law is an expression of compassion.

Chanting for those you speak with about Buddhism to understand your sincere concern for them is very important. Chanting gives rise to wisdom. It produces conviction and joy. Introducing Buddhism to others is challenging, but when you remember that your efforts to do so will lead both those individuals and you yourself to happiness, nothing could be more enjoyable.

Mr. Toda often said: "Sharing Buddhism shouldn't be something painful or unpleasant. It should be done with joy."

Some of those you talk with about Buddhism may immediately decide to take faith and start practicing, but others may not. There's no need to worry. In both cases, your sincere prayers for others and your effort to share Buddhism with them produce enormous benefits. And precisely because it's so challenging, you can tap your inner wisdom and grow as a person. When you sow seeds, flowers are sure to blossom in time.

The key is to talk to people joyfully, filled with appreciation and pride that we can serve as envoys of the Buddha.

Compassion isn't about someone taking pity on the less fortunate from a position of superiority. It is egalitarian, not hierarchical. It is a feeling of empathy for another, equal human being. Its foundation is respect.

Discussing and pursuing the truth together as equals, as fellow human beings, and together awakening to a more genuine, meaningful way of life—that interaction itself is the essence of shakubuku, of sharing the Mystic Law.

In "On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land," the Daishonin describes the "host" who engages the "guest" in dialogue as "a friend in the orchid room." In a room filled with orchids, the flowers' sweet fragrance permeates the clothing of those who enter. In the same way, our dialogues on Buddhism should envelop others with the sweet fragrance of compassion.

Sharing Buddhism does not mean forcing our beliefs on others, nor is it for the sake of the organization. Because it means venerating each person's inherent Buddhahood, it is an act of the highest respect.

Mr. Toda often said: "Deep empathy is the essence of shakubuku." Compassion is the foundation. We should never try to spread Buddhism by arguing with people, forcing our views upon them, or by taking a confrontational stance.

It's not dialogue when you interrupt or insist on your own conclusions. You need to be broad-minded enough to listen patiently without objecting to each little point you might disagree with. That will put the other person at ease and encourage them to listen to what you have to say.

In this sense, Buddhas are true masters of dialogue. Shakyamuni and the Daishonin were without a doubt the kind of individuals whose mere presence brought joy and comfort to others. That's why people eagerly listened to their words.

A certain sutra recounts the following story about Shakyamuni. A person named Upali, a follower of the Jain religion, tried to defeat Shakyamuni in a debate. But he was so moved by Shakyamuni's character and wisdom that he asked to be allowed to join the Buddhist community.

Nevertheless, Shakyamuni, rather than taking pride in winning Upali over, told him to stop and think the matter over carefully.

Impressed even more, Upali confessed: "Venerable sir, I have heard that you have said, 'Offerings should be given to me only, not to others. Offerings should be given to my disciples, not to the disciples of others. Offerings made to me or my disciples are of great fruit, but not the offerings made to others.'"

But now, Upali said, he realized that Shakyamuni would never be so narrow-minded as to make such arbitrary demands, and he begged yet again to be allowed to join the Buddhist order.

When Upali's Jain teacher learned of this, he visited Upali's home with a contingent of his disciples. Upali welcomed them hospitably, but his former Jain teacher called him a fool for setting out to vanquish Shakyamuni in debate only to end up being enticed by Shakyamuni and converting to Buddhism.

Upali replied calmly and courteously: "Sir, such an enticement is good. My dear ones and blood relations, all Brahmans and nobles, should be enticed by those enticements. For that would be for their happiness and welfare for a long time."

I once asked Mr. Toda if teaching others about the Mystic Law is, in effect, teaching ourselves. He replied: "To teach others about the Mystic Law requires that we ourselves live our lives based on Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. There is no other way to communicate the greatness of Buddhism. There isn't any special technique or method for us to master. Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day of the Law . . . means deciding, 'My life is none other than Nam-myoho-renge-kyo!'"

He also said: "Deciding that you yourself are Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the ultimate shakubuku." His tone was firm, indicating he wished to tell young people the truth.

Joyous faith comes from the determination to practice just as the Daishonin teaches. All the Soka Gakkai's efforts have accorded with the spirit of the Daishonin's writings. That is why the true joy and benefits of upholding the Lotus Sutra are found only in the Soka Gakkai.

In short, there is no greater joy than a life dedicated to kosen-rufu, to propagating Buddhism. There is no greater joy than seeing others become happy through our efforts in dialogue to share the Mystic Law. And when we rejoice at others' happiness, our own lives become increasingly pure.

That is why it's important to talk to others about Buddhism without arrogance. Rather, we should do so filled with joy at our good fortune to have been born as human beings and to be able to share even one word about the teachings of Buddhism. That's what matters, not whether people listen to what we have to say.

In "The Benefits of Responding with Joy" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni teaches that those who invite others to hear the Law preached, and who share their seat with them where the Law is preached, acquire enormous benefit (cf. LSOC18, 288). The Lotus Sutra states: "Suppose there is a person who is sitting in the place where the Law is expounded, and when another person appears, the first person urges him to sit down and listen, or offers to share his seat and so persuades him to sit down. The benefits gained by this person will be such that when he is reborn he will be in a place where the lord Shakra is seated, where the heavenly king Brahma is seated, or where a wheel-turning sage king is seated" (LSOC18, 288).

What incredible benefit, then, we will receive when we personally tell others about the teachings and principles of Buddhism!

No matter how the other person reacts, by praising and sharing the Mystic Law with them we attain benefit beyond measure. Realizing this is a source of great joy.

It is also important that we praise those who are working hard to share the Mystic Law with others. They are supremely noble envoys of the Buddha. Such praise brings joy to everyone, ourselves included, and further advances kosen-rufu.

When our faith is so strong that we love the Gohonzon, love daimoku, and love Soka Gakkai activities, the "benefits of responding with joy" will flow forth limitlessly in our lives.

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, vols. 2 and 5, published in Japanese in November 1996 and September 1999.

Section 18.5: Perseverance and Compassion

President Ikeda discusses essential aspects of sharing Buddhism to help guide people to happiness.

Conveying his powerful conviction as the votary of the Lotus Sutra, the Daishonin states: "When it comes to understanding the Lotus Sutra, I have only a minute fraction of the vast ability that T'ien-t'ai and Dengyo possessed. But as regards my ability to endure persecution [or difficulties] and the wealth of my compassion for others, I believe they would hold me in awe" (WND-1, 242).

Though the great Buddhist teachers T'ien-t'ai and Dengyo may surpass him in terms of their depth of understanding of the Lotus Sutra, asserts the Daishonin, he outdoes them in terms of his perseverance and compassion.

Naturally, in spreading the Mystic Law in the Latter Day, it is important to talk to others based on "understanding the Lotus Sutra"—in other words, to present the sutra's teaching and doctrines in a logical and coherent fashion. So, in conceding that T'ien-t'ai and Dengyo provide lucid and rational theoretical explanations, the Daishonin is by no means rejecting the need for these things.

More important, however, are perseverance (that is, the ability to endure difficulties) and compassion. These are indispensable to actually spreading the Law in the evil age of the Latter Day and helping even those experiencing the greatest suffering attain genuine happiness. Perseverance and compassion are like two sides of the same coin. Profound compassion based on a wish to free all people from suffering gives one incomparable strength to endure difficulties and spread the Law.

To endure difficulties, to persevere amid obstacles, does not mean a state of passive acceptance. The Latter Day is an age when evil is rampant. Those aware of their mission to overcome such evil and awaken people to life's ultimate truth must be prepared to continue fighting through any obstacle or difficulty. Their actions are essentially motivated by a solemn, rigorous compassion not to let anyone in the Latter Day lead a life in which they disrespect or slander the Law, the essence of life itself. This unwavering compassion leads directly to the enlightenment of all people in the Latter Day.

Compassion is the driving force behind perseverance, while perseverance is proof of deep compassion.

From Lectures on "The Opening of the Eyes," published in Japanese in June 2006.

Section 18.7: The Best Way to Benefit Others

President Ikeda recalls a conversation with a student division member who was struggling to introduce others to Buddhism and shares his own youthful memories of teaching friends about faith in the Mystic Law.

When I visited Soka University last autumn [in 1997], I had an opportunity to talk at length with some of our student division members. One of them said to me: "I am having a hard time introducing Buddhism to my friends." This deeply troubled him, and his seriousness impressed me. Here he was, worrying about how he could teach Buddhism to his friends and thereby plant the seed of happiness in their lives. What a fine, noble thing to be concerned about!

With the greatest respect, I encouraged him with all my heart: "Everything is hard in the beginning. This is only truer of propagating Buddhism, which the Daishonin's writings describe as the most difficult of all undertakings.

"When I was young, my efforts were just trial and error, but they became the foundation for future success. The important thing is to be determined, positive, and optimistic, and never stop challenging ourselves, no matter the circumstances. Let's be invincible optimists!"

I will never forget his face as he nodded with a smile.

Five months later, he joyfully reported that he had successfully had a friend take up faith. I was so happy to hear that; I was happy because of his sincerity.

Looking back, the first person to practice Buddhism through my introduction was an elementary school teacher who lived in my hometown, Ota. It happened shortly after I began working at Mr. Toda's company. Up to then, I had spoken about Buddhism with quite a few of my friends. Mr. Toda had even kindly met and talked with some of them. But so far, none had taken faith and begun to practice.

Feeling incapable, I studied and practiced hard to develop my ability to speak about Buddhism. I chanted with all my heart and continued talking about Buddhism, driven by the wish to reach one more person, to connect with one more person. I can't begin to measure how much that helped me develop myself.

How delighted I was when I finally convinced someone to embrace Nichiren Buddhism! I could never describe my elation. I decided that I would thoroughly look after them and make sure that they triumphed in life. I invited them to my apartment before work in the morning, and we did gongyo and read the Daishonin's writings. I also remember how I used to stop by their place after work and teach them gongyo.

The development of kosen-rufu lies in repeating such patient, painstaking efforts to awaken one friend after another to faith. That is true Buddhist practice.

When Mr. Toda became second Soka Gakkai president and made his vow to attain a membership of 750,000 households, I pledged: "Mr. Toda is a great teacher of propagation. As his disciple, I vow to become a champion of propagation!" And having made that pledge, I threw myself wholeheartedly into the challenge, creating a groundswell for unprecedented propagation in Kamata, in Bunkyo, in Osaka, and in Yamaguchi.

I remember one discussion meeting where all of the seven or eight young men attending as guests decided to join the Soka Gakkai. I told them that practicing Nichiren Buddhism was the key to absolute happiness, and I assured them that all I wanted was for each of them to have the best life possible.

Such conviction and sincerity will open our friends' hearts and make them receptive to our message.

Propagation must always be a process of deepening friendship and earning trust. In today's world, superficial conversations abound, but genuine dialogue is rare. Sharing Nichiren Buddhism, however, is genuine dialogue—a stimulating exchange based on deep consideration for our friends as we invite them to walk with us on the path of true and complete happiness.

In genuine Buddhist dialogue, we discuss such crucial matters as what is a valuable way to live and what constitutes right and wrong, at times speaking of our daily lives or personal experiences. Pursuing such dialogue is the noble path of humanity. It is the very heart of spreading the Mystic Law. At the same time, sharing Buddhism involves teaching others the fundamental solution to suffering; it is the ultimate act of altruism. And it is the direct path by which we can achieve our human revolution and break out of the shell of our ego.

Those who spread the Mystic Law are true disciples of the Daishonin who carry on his spirit. Nikko Shonin [the Daishonin's direct disciple and successor] praised all who courageously propagated the Daishonin's teachings, declaring to the effect that we should revere as respected seniors in faith those teachers of the Law who engage in propagation, regardless of whether they are junior in years of Buddhist practice (cf. GZ, 1618). And the benefits those who propagate the Law attain are boundless and immeasurable.

Note on terminology: This is from Article 15 of "The Twenty-Six Admonitions of Nikko." Nichiren Daishonin's designated successor, Nikko Shonin, wrote the "Twenty-Six Admonitions" in 1333 for the sake of practitioners of future generations to maintain the purity of the Daishonin's teachings. It outlines the fundamental spirit of faith, practice, and study.

Out of our concern for others' happiness and our desire for world peace, we have held high the banner of kosen-rufu and continued to shed the compassionate light of Buddhism throughout the world, undeterred by slander or abuse. This is the Soka Gakkai's proud and noble history.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, October 7, 1998.

Section 18.8: The Ultimate Expression of Friendship

In The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) often talks about the spirit and practice of Buddhist dialogue.

[In a speech at a young women's division general meeting, held in November 1960]

Some of you may feel you couldn't possibly introduce others to Nichiren Buddhism and successfully have them start practicing. That's OK. Even in President Makiguchi's and President Toda's day, the Soka Gakkai never once pleaded with its members to introduce Buddhism to others. The Daishonin promises that if we share the correct teaching with others, we can change our karma and attain Buddhahood. We therefore engage in propagation activities to transform our karma and become happy. Such efforts also contribute to our friends' happiness and a peaceful and prosperous society. No task is more sublime or sacred.

Sometimes, you may earnestly share this Buddhism with others but find it difficult to convince them to start practicing. But you are still young, so there's absolutely no need to be impatient or worry about results. Spreading the Daishonin's teachings is the most compassionate practice we can undertake as human beings—a practice that simultaneously enables us to develop ourselves. Moreover, because it guides people to happiness and peace, it is the ultimate expression of friendship.

What is important is to have the feeling "That person is suffering, I want them to be happy" and also to talk about Buddhism with those around you from time to time. Even if the person you've been talking with doesn't take faith right away, as long as you maintain a strong unwavering wish for their happiness and a sincere spirit of friendship, the time will definitely come when they will awaken to Buddhism.

It is also vital that leaders not pressure or rebuke members who worry about not being able to convince someone to start practicing. Instead, I want leaders to embrace such members warmly, praising and encouraging them for their earnest efforts to live as emissaries of the Buddha.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 2, "Banner of the People" chapter.

[In response to a member who shared during a train ride in Hiroshima in April 1961: "I have a hard time introducing others to this Buddhism . . . ."]

It's the same for everyone. Propagation is the most difficult Buddhist practice. It's no simple matter. Teaching people the power of Nichiren Buddhism today is just as challenging as it would have been trying to teach people a thousand years ago about atomic energy or explain to them the wonders of radio and television. You can do your best to explain the teachings of Buddhism, but people still may not understand. However, once they try practicing it, they can appreciate how wonderful it is. Then, more often than not, they'll ask themselves why they didn't start practicing sooner. That is probably true of many of you. So the important thing is to treasure your friendships and persevere in your efforts to engage in dialogue.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 4, "Triumph" chapter.

[In response to a men's division member who said: "I'm very busy with work and can't even take a day off. I really want to share Buddhism with others, but I haven't had much success and am feeling very frustrated."]

To be troubled about helping others is truly wonderful. It is the noblest and most respectworthy of problems, an expression of genuine compassion. It is the very concern of a Bodhisattva of the Earth and the Buddha.

What is the key to enabling others to practice Nichiren Buddhism? It is determination. As long as you have firm resolve, you can transform any situation.

You can share this practice no matter where you are. President Toda was arrested for his beliefs and placed in prison, where he underwent a profound awakening to the ultimate truth of the Lotus Sutra. Even behind bars, he told the prison guards about the greatness of Nichiren Buddhism.

First, it's important to pray wholeheartedly to the Gohonzon to share Nichiren Daishonin's teachings with others. When you do so, people who are seeking Buddhism will appear in your environment. It's also crucial that you speak with whomever you can about the practice. Of course, there is no guarantee that any of them will take faith right away. But what matters is that you continue to steadily deepen your bonds of friendship with them, praying every day for their happiness while continuing to engage them in dialogue. If you plant seeds and nurture them with care, they will definitely bloom one day and bear fruit. There's no need to be impatient.

In addition, even if your friends haven't joined the Soka Gakkai, you can still bring them to meetings and study and chant together with them. It's important to let things happen naturally.

At any rate, all your efforts to share Nichiren Buddhism will come back to you as good fortune. Whether or not the other person starts to practice, you are still creating causes for your own attainment of Buddhahood.

And when someone you've been trying to introduce to the practice does decide to become a member, it is truly the most wonderful, joyous feeling.

The act of spreading the Daishonin's teachings—of striving to help each person change their life on a fundamental level—is an act of supreme good that guarantees a future of eternal happiness. It is an act of compassion millions of times greater than any other act of charity or philanthropy.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 13, "Guiding Star" chapter.

The distinguishing characteristic of Nichiren Buddhism is its ultimate goal of worldwide kosen-rufu and its emphasis on practicing toward that end. That is why Nichiren Daishonin established "practicing for oneself and practicing for others"—in other words, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo oneself and teaching others to do the same—as the two essential pillars of Buddhist practice.

Why does Nichiren Daishonin place so much importance on propagation? It is because the great path for each practitioner to attain enlightenment in this lifetime lies in actively striving to spread Buddhism with the same vow for kosen-rufu as Nichiren Daishonin himself.

The Daishonin writes: "If you are of the same mind as Nichiren, you must be a Bodhisattva of the Earth" (WND-1, 385), and "One who recites even one word or phrase of the Lotus Sutra and who speaks about it to another person is the emissary of Shakyamuni Buddha, lord of the teachings" (WND-1, 331).

These passages are clear declarations that those who take kosen-rufu—Nichiren Daishonin's cherished wish—as their mission, and who spread the correct teaching, are Bodhisattvas of the Earth and emissaries of the Buddha. It is by carrying out our practice toward that end that our lives become attuned with the Daishonin's and that we manifest the life states of bodhisattva and Buddhahood. Consequently, pure, strong life force and boundless wisdom well forth from within. In this way, we can transform our lives, opening the path toward our human revolution, a fundamental transformation in our inner state of being.

Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

When our lives change on a profound level, we can overcome suffering that comes from illness, financial hardship, family discord, and so on, in accord with the Buddhist principles of the "oneness of body and mind" and the "oneness of life and its environment." As a result, we can change our karma or destiny.

The Soka Gakkai has always advanced with unwavering commitment to kosen-rufu exactly as the Daishonin teaches. On the day that Josei Toda was inaugurated as the second president of the Soka Gakkai [on May 3, 1951], he boldly declared that he would dedicate the rest of his life to achieving a membership of 750,000 households. His reason for setting such a monumental goal was to lead the way for all Soka Gakkai members to attain a life state of absolute happiness. Shin'ichi responded to this call, standing up alongside Toda with a firm resolve to make his mentor's vision a reality. Subsequently, other youth, countless comrades in faith, followed his lead.

The flame of courage burned brightly in the members' hearts, and an unshakable conviction that they would definitely become happy gradually took root.

Though faced with various problems, they refused to be defeated, brimming with joy and pride of spreading the Mystic Law as Bodhisattvas of the Earth and emissaries of the Buddha. They were more troubled by the sufferings of their friends than their own illnesses or financial woes. Concerned about the future of their country and society at large, they prayed wholeheartedly for world peace.

In their innermost hearts, they had already attained a vast state of life that allowed them to take all personal problems and hardships in stride. This fundamental transformation dramatically changed the reality of their daily lives and brought them great benefit and happiness.

To dedicate our lives to the vow for kosen-rufu together with our mentor—this is the direct path for achieving our own human revolution and changing our karma, a path that leads to absolute happiness.

Taking part in this noble endeavor of kosen-rufu could be called our unique privilege and honor as Soka Gakkai members.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 13, "Guiding Star" chapter.

Section 18.10: Confidently Sharing Our Convictions and Personal Experiences in Faith

At a meeting with youth training course participants from around the world, President Ikeda opened the floor for a question-and-answer session.

[In response to a member asking: "We are earnestly carrying out dialogue to introduce our friends to Buddhism. How should we respond to people who say, 'I understand what you're saying, but I do not want to join'?]

Prayer is the key. The important thing is to pray to the Gohonzon with steadfast determination. There is nothing more powerful than prayer.

This is not mere theory. Without prayer, all our efforts will ultimately get us nowhere. But when we wholeheartedly pray and talk to people, things will definitely begin to change.

Also, everyone's timing is different. The time will someday come for that person to awaken to the correct teaching of Buddhism. If we pray for them, it will definitely happen.

We must not be impatient. Please show patience and forbearance. Patience is essential for victory.

And when people don't respond the way we hope, aren't they giving us a wonderful opportunity to chant lots of daimoku?!

The benefit is ours to enjoy. No effort that we make for kosen-rufu is ever wasted. There is no such thing as a "loss." Soka Gakkai activities bring nothing but gain.

[In response to a request to share some points to bear in mind when telling other young people about the greatness of Nichiren Buddhism]

The important thing is to talk to them with sincerity. The person may be hearing about Buddhism for the first time. Therefore, it's important that you are genuine and openhearted, speaking in an easy-to-understand way.

Talk to them confidently about the greatness of Buddhism and faith. Tell them about living a life of conviction. Explain to them how you have forged a life of value while enjoying proof of the power of your Buddhist practice and how you are advancing with courage and boundless hope for the future.

Ultimately, it all comes down to you proudly sharing your conviction and experience in faith. Doing so plants the seeds of happiness and hope in your friends' lives. These seeds will undoubtedly take root, bud, and eventually flower. Until then, it is enough that you continue chanting and wait for that time to come.

Question-and-answer session at a world peace gongyo meeting, Tokyo, September 8, 2002.
