Chapter 22: The Mission and Vow of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth

Section 22.1: Realizing Our Identity as Bodhisattvas of the Earth

Soka Gakkai members' greatest pride is their mission and vow as Bodhisattvas of the Earth. President Ikeda has described the Soka Gakkai as "a gathering of champions of humanity, leading unparalleled lives of the highest significance," and "an assembly of fellow Bodhisattvas of the Earth who share the noble mission of achieving kosen-rufu and world peace."

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are the Buddha's true disciples who, in the essential teaching (comprising the latter 14 chapters) of the Lotus Sutra, vow to work for people's happiness in this troubled saha world in the evil age after the Buddha's passing. Only these bodhisattvas can carry out kosen-rufu, or the widespread propagation of the correct teaching of Buddhism, in this age known as the Latter Day of the Law.

In The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, President Ikeda engages in an expansive discussion of the significance of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

On the emergence of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth in the Lotus Sutra: The Bodhisattvas of the Earth make a very dramatic entrance. The earth splits open and a countless number of bodhisattvas emerge simultaneously, each exuding a golden radiance. None of the bodhisattvas described in any of the other Buddhist sutras are as splendid in appearance as the Bodhisattvas of the Earth. The bodhisattvas of the theoretical teaching (the first 14 chapters of the Lotus Sutra) and the bodhisattvas from other worlds who have assembled to hear the Buddha preach the Lotus Sutra are all filled with awe and wonder at their sight.

Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law. Bodhisattvas of the theoretical teaching and bodhisattvas from other worlds refers to all bodhisattvas who appear in the Lotus Sutra other than the Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

Nichiren Daishonin says that in comparison to the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, these other bodhisattvas "seemed like a pack of apes or monkeys, with the new bodhisattvas appearing among them like so many Shakras" (WND-1, 252). (Shakra, also known as Indra, is together with Brahma, one of the two main guardian deities of Buddhism.) The Lotus Sutra also stresses how noble and worthy of respect the Bodhisattvas of the Earth are.

Although they are called bodhisattvas, they are actually Buddhas. Where did the Bodhisattvas of the Earth come from? The Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai says they had dwelled "in the depths of the Dharma nature, the ultimate region of the profound source" (OTT, 119). This quote is from T'ien-t'ai's Words and Phrases of the Lotus Sutra. The realm from which they emerged, in other words, is the truth that exists in the depths of life, the fundamental Law of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are people who ceaselessly take action based on the Mystic Law; they are always moving forward. Bringing that vibrant energy to pulse within us is to "emerge as a Bodhisattva of the Earth" in our own lives. It means to break out of the shell of our small, lesser selves.

To emerge as a Bodhisattva of the Earth is to carry out a revolution in our state of life. Spreading this revolution of life state from one person to another is the effort to transform the life state of society and to elevate the life state of humanity as a whole. This change is expressed symbolically through the image of breaking through or splitting open the earth described in the Lotus Sutra.

The power of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is the power to transcend all differences and help others achieve happiness through the fundamental power we have as human beings. The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are plain, ordinary people, utterly and fully human champions. That is their pride. Their emergence is an earthshaking event and a thundering announcement of the great underlying power and potential of life.

Distinctions such as race and ethnicity are not the true essence of our humanity. They are illusory, like a mirage. Neither can ultimately serve as a shared home, or common ground, for all humankind. Overemphasis on such definitions of identity can exacerbate our differences and function as a cause for opposition and conflict. What we need to do now is change the way we view our existence as human beings. When that changes, everything will change.

Together, let us transcend the confines of national and ethnic identity. We must realize that we are not powerless, not merely lumps of physical matter, not slaves to our genes. We need to awaken to the fact that we are much more, that we possess within us enormous, limitless potential.

Human beings are one with the universe, and the power we each possess is equal to all the power of the universe—this is the message of the Lotus Sutra.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth don't reluctantly drag themselves forward after being called on by Shakyamuni; they leap forth eagerly as if they have been waiting for that moment. This self-motivated faith to energetically spring forth is the key to eternal happiness.

Securing eternal happiness is the purpose of faith in the Mystic Law. This life is like a dream. We practice Nichiren Buddhism so that we can awaken from that dream and realize such enduring happiness in our present existence. We call this attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. That's why we must strive earnestly here and now.

What do we need to do this? The Daishonin states: "If you are of the same mind as Nichiren, you must be a Bodhisattva of the Earth" (WND-1, 385). Those who exert themselves for kosen-rufu with the same commitment as Nichiren Daishonin are genuine Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

The forward progress of kosen-rufu can be likened to the revolution of the Earth around the sun, while our steady efforts in human revolution can be likened to the rotation of Earth on its axis. These two motions are inseparable.

When one is "of the same mind as Nichiren," one fears nothing. During World War II, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi and Josei Toda, the Soka Gakkai's first and second presidents, refused to retreat a single step, even in the face of persecution by the wartime Japanese militarist authorities. They carried on the lionhearted spirit of the Daishonin.

It is deeply significant that Mr. Toda's awakening, a foundational event in our movement, took place while he was in prison. He was jailed for upholding the correct teaching of the Lotus Sutra. It was in his prison cell that Mr. Toda had the sudden realization "I am a Bodhisattva of the Earth!"

He accomplished human revolution amid this great adversity. Adversity in the course of Buddhist practice is a stepping-stone to enlightenment. With his very life, he demonstrated the truth of the Daishonin's assertion "If you are of the same mind as Nichiren, you must be a Bodhisattva of the Earth" (WND-1, 385). In the strictest sense, unless we encounter difficulties in our efforts for kosen-rufu, we cannot truly be "of the same mind as Nichiren."

Mr. Toda's awakening in prison is an eternal source of inspiration for the Soka Gakkai. It is the moment that the Lotus Sutra was brought to life again in modern times, the moment when the sun of human revolution rose in the present day. Though unnoticed by others in that time of profound darkness, the light of dawn had begun to shine in Mr. Toda's heart.

"I am a Bodhisattva of the Earth!"—today's mighty river of kosen-rufu began to flow dynamically from his powerful conviction.

Having intensively pondered the question of "What is a Buddha?" Mr. Toda arrived at the realization that it is none other than one's own life and the great life of the universe itself, and that those two things are one and the same.

Like the saying "Dig beneath your feet, there you will find a spring," when Mr. Toda delved into the source of his own being, the foundation common to the lives of all people was revealed—the eternal life of the universe itself. While awakening to the source of his own being, he also awakened to the foundation shared by all humanity—that everyone on the most fundamental level of life is a Bodhisattva of the Earth. As Soka Gakkai members, we now share this awareness of the common "home," or source, of life.

This is because Mr. Toda strove tirelessly to convey this profound inner conviction to his fellow members. When calling on them to join him in working for kosen-rufu, he would often address them as "my dear fellow Bodhisattvas of the Earth."

Those who live true to the ultimate essence of their lives are noble and strong—that is the lesson that Mr. Toda sought with all his heart to teach us and what he personally embodied throughout his life. Each person has tremendous power. Such power will not fail to well forth in the life of a genuine Bodhisattva of the Earth. That conviction is the starting point for all our endeavors.

The source or wellspring of our being is the pure, expansive life of the universe itself. Human revolution is the process of awakening to and demonstrating this truth.

In any place or land, it is always the Bodhisattvas of the Earth who shoulder the mission of widely spreading the correct teaching received from the Buddha, imparting it to all human beings. Why is this? It is because, in terms of their inner enlightenment, they have the same life state as the Buddha, but in terms of their outward actions, they strive as bodhisattvas. They could be described as "bodhisattva-Buddhas."

If they did not possess the same life state as their teacher, the Buddha, they could not correctly propagate the Mystic Law. Furthermore, carrying out kosen-rufu in this trouble-filled world necessitates going out into society and among the people as fellow human beings. The Bodhisattvas of the Earth thus fulfill both these conditions—embodying the inner life state of Buddhahood and actively engaging with the real world. That is why it says at the end of the "Supernatural Powers" chapter of the Lotus Sutra: "This person . . . advances through the world" (LSOC21, 318). The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are engaged in the world. They go out among the people.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are like the sun. They are also like lotus flowers, which bloom beautifully in muddy water; they live in this corrupt world yet remain unsullied by its evils.

When we are like the sun, all darkness is banished from our lives. Each day is filled with light, and we can brightly illuminate the lives of others, too. When we are like the lotus, we can change the muddy swamp of desire and suffering into joyous enlightenment.

The "Emerging from the Earth" chapter of the Lotus Sutra describes the Bodhisattvas of the Earth as being "like the lotus flower in the water" (LSOC15, 263). As Bodhisattvas of the Earth, we dwell in the "swamp" of society; we certainly do not seek to escape from reality. In addition, our lives are in no way stained or tainted by the mire of society. Why? Because we never forget our mission.

The Daishonin says of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth: "Their sole purpose is to propagate Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the one great reason for the Buddha's appearance in this world" (GZ, 833 [GZ, new ed., 1161]). This quote is from "Oko kikigaki" (The Recorded Lectures), not included in WND, vols. 1 or 2.

In other words, they are committed to kosen-rufu and embody the spirit to share the Mystic Law with others. Striving in Buddhist practice with wholehearted devotion to kosen-rufu is the spirit of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth have been steadfastly practicing the Mystic Law since the distant past. They have forged lives that are centered on faith and the Mystic Law. The Daishonin describes them as "the ones who had thoroughly forged their resolve" (WND-1, 953). That's why they can endure great hardships in this troubled saha world to spread the correct teaching of Buddhism. In the depths of their lives, they dwell in the world of Buddhahood.

Note on terminology: The saha world is this world, which is full of suffering. Often translated as the world of endurance. In Sanskrit, saha means the earth; it derives from a root meaning "to bear" or "to endure." In the Chinese versions of Buddhist scriptures, saha is rendered as endurance. In this context, the saha world indicates a world in which people must endure suffering.

The bodhisattvas of the theoretical teaching and the bodhisattvas from other worlds who are described in the Lotus Sutra are bodhisattvas still aspiring to attain enlightenment. They are therefore not strong enough to propagate Buddhism in this saha world. The only ones who can bear the weight of this mission are the bodhisattvas of the essential teaching—the Bodhisattvas of the Earth—who are seasoned experts in practicing the Mystic Law of time without beginning.

Mr. Makiguchi said: "Although there is a saying that even dust, when it accumulates, can form a mountain, there are in fact no mountains that are made of accumulated dust. The most that accumulated dust might form is a small mound. Real mountains are formed by massive shifts in the earth's crust. In the same way, you can accumulate all the minor good you want, but it will never become great good." This quote is translated from Japanese, from Makiguchi Tsunesaburo zenshu (Collected Writings of Tsunesaburo Makiguchi), vol. 10, published in 1987, pages 140–41.

The bodhisattvas of the theoretical teaching are like those trying to attain Buddhahood by accumulating minor good. In contrast, the bodhisattvas of the essential teaching—the Bodhisattvas of the Earth—make the great life force of the world of Buddhahood issue forth from "the depths of the Dharma nature" (OTT, 119), the innermost reaches of their being, with the explosive force of an erupting volcano.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth constantly practice the Mystic Law and live each moment deeply attuned to the eternal dimension of life. While in terms of their practice they are bodhisattvas, in terms of their inner enlightenment they are Buddhas.

But the image people tend to have of a Buddha is that of a transcendent or superhuman being. Contrary to this image, Bodhisattvas of the Earth devote themselves as bodhisattvas who are ordinary human beings practicing the Mystic Law. They devote themselves as real people. This is profoundly significant.

A restoration of trust and faith in human beings—this is the key for a religion of the 21st century. I believe the world is eagerly awaiting the appearance of such a great teaching of humanism and life.

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, vols. 3 and 5, published in Japanese in July 1997 and September 1999.

Section 22.2: Soka Gakkai Members Are the True Bodhisattvas of the Earth

Based on the Lotus Sutra, President Ikeda discusses the qualities that characterize the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, whose mission is the realization of kosen-rufu. These qualities—courage, wisdom, perseverance, and character—are exemplified, he says, by the members of the Soka Gakkai.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are bodhisattvas who possess within their lives the Mystic Law of time without beginning. Nichiren Daishonin says that, had they not been entrusted with the supreme Law, they could not possibly appear and propagate it in the Latter Day (cf. WND-1, 372). The "supreme Law" is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the teaching implicit in the "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra, is the "highly effective medicine" (LSOC16, 269) for curing the ills of all living beings in the Latter Day of the Law. It is the Law of life. Only when one possesses this Law in one's own being and is able to communicate it to others in the Latter Day can one help free people from suffering.

Nichiren Daishonin, in his role as Bodhisattva Superior Practices, the leader of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, based himself on the conviction that Nam-myoho-renge-kyo was the very essence of his being. And he inscribed his enlightened state of life in the form of the Gohonzon to enable all people of the Latter Day to attain enlightenment.

The Daishonin states: "The accepting and upholding of this original Law is expressed in the single word 'belief' or 'faith.' The single word 'belief' is the sharp sword with which one confronts and overcomes fundamental darkness or ignorance" (OTT, 119–20). He also says: "If you are of the same mind as Nichiren, you must be a Bodhisattva of the Earth" (WND-1, 385).

We who strive for kosen-rufu with faith in the Gohonzon and in the same spirit as the Daishonin are also Bodhisattvas of the Earth who uphold the supreme Law, just as he did.

The "Emerging from the Earth" chapter of the Lotus Sutra describes the Bodhisattvas of the Earth emerging from "the empty space in the lower part of the saha world" (cf. LSOC15, 260). The Daishonin explains that this "lower region represents the principle of truth" (OTT, 119).

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth emerge from the realm of truth into this actual saha world. They are, in other words, courageous individuals who spring forth from the fundamental Law of the universe, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, to take their place among the people. That's why they are never stuck or deadlocked. They can limitlessly tap fundamental life force and wisdom from the realm of the Mystic Law. Even in this evil age of the Latter Day, they can personally propagate the Mystic Law and endure any obstacles they may encounter along the way.

All who spread the Buddha's teachings in the real world in this corrupt latter age, exactly as the Daishonin instructs, are Bodhisattvas of the Earth. In the present day, the Lotus Sutra's description of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth perfectly fits Soka Gakkai members.

For instance, the sutra describes these bodhisattvas as "firm in their intent and thought" (LSOC15, 256). Soka Gakkai members, too, are people of resolute mind who carry through with their intentions, people who persist and persevere. The pioneer members of the Many Treasures Group, in particular, have remained steadfast in faith from the earliest days of our movement, no matter what has happened. No criticism or insult could deter them from their purpose; once they decided to accomplish something, they saw it through to the end. The unwavering commitment that shines in their hearts is the badge of honor of Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

The Lotus Sutra also says that the Bodhisattvas of the Earth "skillfully [learn] the bodhisattva way, unsoiled by worldly things like the lotus flower in the water" (LSOC15, 263). Soka Gakkai members, too, remaining unsullied by the five impurities that proliferate in society, live with resilience and a pure-hearted commitment to the humanistic values of Buddhism. They have helped those struggling in the mire of reality.

Note on terminology: The five impurities, also called five defilements, are impurity of the age, of desire, of living beings, of thought (or view), and of life span. This term appears in the "Expedient Means" chapter of the Lotus Sutra: (1) Impurity of the age includes repeated disruptions of the social or natural environment; (2) Impurity of desire is the tendency to be ruled by the five delusive inclinations, i.e., greed, anger, foolishness, arrogance, and doubt; (3) Impurity of living beings is the physical and spiritual decline of human beings; (4) Impurity of thought, or impurity of view, is the prevalence of wrong views such as the five false views; and (5) Impurity of life span is the shortening of the life spans of living beings.

We cannot fulfill our mission as Bodhisattvas of the Earth by shunning engagement with others, secluding ourselves in some mountain retreat far from the reality of everyday life.

The sutra further describes the Bodhisattvas of the Earth as follows: "They are clever at difficult questions and answers, their minds know no fear. They have firmly cultivated persevering minds, upright in dignity and virtue" (LSOC15, 263).

"Clever at difficult questions and answers." Certainly, Soka Gakkai members are masters of dialogue. You have a wisdom forged by striving on the front lines of kosen-rufu. When you are criticized or abused, you deftly parry, "Well then, let's talk about what true happiness is," displaying a keen and flexible wisdom. As Soka Gakkai members, all of you are people of wisdom skilled at answering difficult questions.

"Their minds know no fear." You, too, are truly courageous champions, afraid of no one. You have fought steadfastly against unjust forces that have trampled on the people.

"They have firmly cultivated persevering minds." Likewise, perseverance is your trademark. Though some of your friends or fellow members may habitually complain or be self-centered, you have never abandoned a single one. You are people of supreme perseverance. And you have also triumphed over your own difficulties through perseverance. You are truly champions of compassion and conviction.

"Upright in dignity and virtue." Your hearts, your lives, too, are shining. You brim with personal appeal that draws people to you. Everyone recognizes your wealth of virtues.

In this way, each of you possesses the power and qualities of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are "a treasure among persons" (LSOC15, 262). They are treasures of their communities. They are treasures of their countries and the world. They are infinitely noble and worthy of respect.

Each of you possesses the spirit of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth. You have the spirit to resolutely protect the Law, and the bodhisattva spirit to encourage others and help relieve people's suffering. You sincerely respect others. That is the spirit of the Lotus Sutra and of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

Each of you is also actively carrying out the practice of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

The Bodhisattvas of the Earth are born in the time and place where people are suffering and struggling the most.

Describing the situation in the Latter Day of the Law, the Daishonin writes: "[Clinging] all the more stubbornly to their doctrines . . . [t]hose who espouse Hinayana reject Mahayana, and those who espouse provisional teachings attack the true teaching, until the country is overrun with slanderers of the Law" (WND-1, 400). While he is referring specifically to confusion as to which Buddhist teachings are correct, his words in a sense parallel the spiritual state of society today. People are powerfully attached to shallow values, preferring the trivial to the meaningful and momentous. They are drawn to the fake, the inauthentic, and have an aversion to the genuine and the real. The Latter Day is a time when shallow ways of living and thinking prevail and profound ways are disdained.

In such an upside-down world, Soka Gakkai members have persisted in presenting the way to live a good and true life to those who have fallen adrift through loss of direction and purpose. They have continued to provide illumination as leaders of the people, just like the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, who are described as each being "the leader of their own great assembly" (cf. LSOC15, 253).

Mr. Toda said: "I am now aware that we have all appeared in this world with the great mission to propagate Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, or the seven-character Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law. If I define our status in accord with this conviction, we are all Bodhisattvas of the Earth."

Note on terminology: Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is written with seven Chinese characters (nam, or namu, being comprised of two characters) and represents the supreme essence of the entire 28-chapter Lotus Sutra.

Through your actions and achievements, you have all shown the truth of this lion's roar. Without a doubt, Nichiren Daishonin and all the Buddhas of the universe are praising and applauding your great accomplishments as Bodhisattvas of the Earth active in this century.

But so much misery and suffering still remain on our planet. The world is growing more chaotic and confused. The endless journey of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth continues—for the sake of peace and happiness for humanity. Therefore, please lead long, healthy, vigorous lives. The world is awaiting your smiling faces.

From Lectures on the "Expedient Means" and "Life Span" Chapters of the Lotus Sutra, vol. 2, published in Japanese in January 1996.

Section 22.3: The Virtues of the Four Leaders of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth

President Ikeda discusses the virtues of the four leaders of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth as they relate to our own lives, asserting that Soka Gakkai members are the Bodhisattvas of the Earth of the present day.

Mr. Toda used to say that we, Soka Gakkai members who are striving to achieve kosen-rufu, are the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, and that being the case, we are certain to be able to lead the kind of life we desire.

The four bodhisattvas who appear in the Lotus Sutra as the leaders of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth are Superior Practices, Boundless Practices, Pure Practices, and Firmly Established Practices (cf. LSOC15, 254). What is the significance of these four bodhisattvas? While this can be discussed from various perspectives, in The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin touches on one aspect in relation to the four elements of earth, water, fire, and wind. He explains that all the activities of the universe, which are symbolized by the four elements, are essentially the functions of the four bodhisattvas and the compassionate workings of Myoho-renge-kyo.

Note on terminology: Myoho-renge-kyo is written with five Chinese characters, while Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is written with seven (nam, or namu, being comprised of two characters). The Daishonin often uses Myoho-renge-kyo synonymously with Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in his writings.

I would like to give a simple overview of these functions as they relate to leadership qualities, based on the Daishonin's remarks in the Orally Transmitted Teachings.

First of all, Bodhisattva Superior Practices can be likened to fire. The Daishonin says: "Fire is that which burns things" (OTT, 118). Courageous practitioners of the Mystic Law "burn" their earthly desires to produce the light of wisdom, illuminating the world's darkness. Just as a roaring fire sends flames leaping high into the air, they brim with irrepressible energy and inspire everyone with their passionate resolve. They stand in the vanguard and ignite a flame of courage and enthusiasm in others' hearts. They light the way forward. They function as outstanding leaders in society and the world at large. This can be seen as an aspect of the virtues of Bodhisattva Superior Practices.

Leaders in the realm of Nichiren Buddhism need to constantly strive to improve themselves, to always take the lead and act with bracing courage. They must never be arrogant or high-handed, seeking the easy way out and making others do all the hard work.

Bodhisattva Boundless Practices can be likened to the wind. The Daishonin says: "Wind is that which blows away dust and grime" (OTT, 118). Just as the wind blows unhindered to clear away all dust and grime, practitioners of the Mystic Law can freely carry out their activities, sweeping away all obstacles as if they were "no more than dust before the wind" (cf. WND-1, 280). This is the virtue of Bodhisattva Boundless Practices. We possess within us wisdom and life force that can never be obstructed by anything.

Bodhisattva Pure Practices can be likened to water. The Daishonin says: "Water is that which purifies things" (OTT, 118). Like flowing water, practitioners of the Mystic Law always stay pure of heart, never sullied by the muck and mire of real life, and purify everything around them. Though they plunge into the midst of this polluted world, their vibrant, beautiful lives remain untainted. In fact, they spread their pure-heartedness to all around them. This is the virtue of Bodhisattva Pure Practices.

Bodhisattva Firmly Established Practices can be likened to the earth. The Daishonin says: "The great earth is that which nourishes plants and trees" (OTT, 118). Like the rich earth that nourishes the many different kinds of plants and trees, practitioners of the Mystic Law protect and care for everyone alike. They provide solid support for everyone and nourish them with their warm encouragement. Unshakable and dauntless, they impart a feeling of infinite security and assurance to those around them. This is the virtue of Bodhisattva Firmly Established Practices.

Nichiren Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, took on the role of the leader of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth (namely, Bodhisattva Superior Practices). As long as we dedicate ourselves to realizing kosen-rufu, striving in our Buddhist practice with the "same mind as Nichiren" (WND-1, 385), the powerful functions of these four bodhisattvas will also appear in our lives. Surely nothing could be more wonderful.

There is profound significance in the fact that the word practices is part of the names of all four of these bodhisattvas. Without practice or action, one cannot be a bodhisattva. Without action, one cannot attain Buddhahood.

A self-centered life is empty and base. The Bodhisattvas of the Earth respect others and strive to benefit them.

I hope that you will all support and protect your noble fellow members—standing in the vanguard of kosen-rufu like Superior Practices, taking action freely like Boundless Practices, with a pure heart like Pure Practices, and with a resolute commitment like Firmly Established Practices.

Let's cast aside selfishness, be unswayed by others' approval or disapproval, and work tirelessly for people's happiness and a brighter future. That is the way to bring forth inner strength and to attain Buddhahood.

From a speech at a nationwide representative conference, Tokyo, March 29, 1996.

Section 22.4: Stand-Alone Faith Infused with a Vow for Kosen-rufu

This selection features a scene from The New Human Revolution, in which the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) prepares a lecture on Nichiren Daishonin's writing "The True Aspect of All Phenomena." For publication in the Seikyo Shimbun at the beginning of 1977, the Soka Gakkai's Year of Study, the lecture emphasized that stand-alone faith infused with a vow for kosen-rufu is the defining characteristic of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

Shin'ichi wrote: "Because we are Bodhisattvas of the Earth, because we are the original disciples of Nichiren Daishonin from the remote past, we have appeared on the grand stage of kosen-rufu in the Latter Day of the Law. We have a profound mission and are directly connected to the Daishonin. When we really take on problems and challenges, chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, and make efforts based on a great sense of responsibility for kosen-rufu, the life state of Buddhahood, of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, embodied by the Daishonin cannot fail to manifest itself in our lives. I have held fast to this belief, even at times in my own life when there was no one to turn to for help, when I had to decide myself what to do and press forward courageously."

Shin'ichi had the firm conviction, as immovable as Mount Fuji, that the Soka Gakkai had always followed the path of faith directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin.

Delving deeper into the true nature of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, he wrote: "The defining characteristic of bodhisattvas is their vow. The vow of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is to propagate the Lotus Sutra. That's why it is important for us to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with this vow for kosen-rufu, resolving with all our hearts to help those around us become genuinely happy. From a strict point of view, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo without that vow is not the prayer of Bodhisattvas of the Earth."

The vow for kosen-rufu brims with the powerful life force of the Buddha, which can vanquish all negative influences.

Shin'ichi wanted every single member to enjoy great benefit. He wanted them to overcome illness, financial hardship, and every other kind of adversity and become truly happy. Their prayers to triumph over such obstacles needed to be infused with a vow for kosen-rufu.

We all have our own problems and sufferings. To surmount them, it's important to have the determination to do so for the sake of kosen-rufu. If we are suffering from illness, for example, then vowing to overcome that illness and gain the strength and life force we need to freely take action for kosen-rufu and demonstrate the validity of Nichiren Buddhism to others will become a tremendous impetus for our recovery.

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in itself, of course, brings us benefit. But when our prayer to overcome our illness meshes with a deep sense of mission for kosen-rufu, it powerfully sets in motion the wheels of change toward a fundamental inner transformation, a transformation of our state of life and our karma. When we chant earnestly based on a vow to achieve kosen-rufu, the noble life state of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth emerges within us, the enlightened life state of Nichiren Daishonin begins to pulse within us, and we can bring forth our innate Buddhahood. This is a revolution of our state of life, and it makes possible a dramatic transformation of our karma.

In addition, when we struggle with and chant about how to share Buddhism with others and to realize our goals for kosen-rufu, we are already expressing the life state of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth. Through such efforts, therefore, we can overcome and solve our individual problems as well.

When the bright sun of the noble life state of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth rises within us, the darkness of sufferings is dispelled, and we can walk boldly and bravely along the sure path to happiness.

Discussing the passage "At first only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three, and a hundred followed, chanting and teaching others" (WND-1, 385), Shin'ichi emphasized the importance of courageous stand-alone faith.

He said: "Whatever the age, standing alone, or self-reliance, is a fundamental and unchanging principle of kosen-rufu. The Daishonin as well as Presidents Makiguchi and Toda all resolutely stood alone. This is the spirit of Buddhism and the heart of champions of Soka.

"To stand alone, practically speaking, means for each of us to take full responsibility for the mission of spreading the Mystic Law in all our personal realms of influence, including in our families and communities.

"We all have relationships—with family members, relatives, friends, and others—that are particular to each of us. From the perspective of the Mystic Law, those relationships constitute the true realm of our mission, and each of these people shares a profound karmic connection with us. Each of us alone is responsible and qualified to propagate the Mystic Law exactly where we are.

"That's what makes the principle of standing alone so important. We need to be aware that we are here now as emissaries of Nichiren Daishonin. And it is the mission of Bodhisattvas of the Earth to stand up and take action in their own respective spheres. Never forget that this is the only way kosen-rufu is realized."

Spreading the philosophy of Nichiren Buddhism in our immediate environment is an unglamorous and exceedingly challenging endeavor. Because those around us know us so well, pretense won't work. The only thing is to keep striving to improve ourselves, while taking action with sincerity, integrity, perseverance, and great passion and showing actual proof of our faith. But in such efforts lies the true essence of Buddhist practice.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 24, "Vigilant Safeguarding" chapter.

Section 22.5: "This Is My Vow, and I Will Never Forsake It!"

In his treatise "The Opening of the Eyes," Nichiren Daishonin declares: "I will be the pillar of Japan. I will be the eyes of Japan. I will be the great ship of Japan. This is my vow, and I will never forsake it!" (WND-1, 280–81). Discussing this well-known passage, President Ikeda explains how noble it is to devote our lives to fulfilling our vow for kosen-rufu.

"I will be the pillar of Japan. I will be the eyes of Japan. I will be the great ship of Japan" (WND-1, 280–81). In this lofty vow, we find the three virtues of sovereign, teacher, and parent.

We can surmise that this was the great vow Nichiren Daishonin had in his heart when he established his teaching (on April 28, 1253). "The Opening of the Eyes" was written almost 20 years later (in 1272). No matter what onslaughts of obstacles and devilish functions assailed him, nothing could shake his unwavering commitment. He suffered countless instances of slander and abuse. He was the target of malicious plots and intrigues. The authorities attempted to execute him and exiled him twice.

But not even the most furious attacks by the devil king of the sixth heaven could succeed in extinguishing the flame of kosen-rufu that blazed in his heart. On the contrary, they only caused that inner flame to burn even brighter. With the words "This is my vow, and I will never forsake it!" (WND-1, 281), he declares that he will never for all eternity break that vow.

Note on terminology: The devil king of the sixth heaven, also called the devil king or heavenly devil, is the king of devils, who dwells in the highest or the sixth heaven of the world of desire. He is also named Freely Enjoying Things Conjured by Others, the king who makes free use of the fruits of others' efforts for his own pleasure. Served by innumerable minions, he obstructs Buddhist practice and delights in sapping the life force of other beings, the manifestation of the fundamental ignorance inherent in life. The devil king is a personification of the negative tendency to force others to one's will at any cost.

People of strong faith who personally embrace and strive to fulfill this vow of the Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, bring forth the power of Buddhahood in their own lives. We of the Soka Gakkai have achieved resounding victory in all endeavors because we have carried out this vow with selfless dedication.

Making a vow is central to our efforts to spread the Mystic Law in the evil age of the Latter Day of the Law. Without a powerful commitment to uphold and spread the correct teaching throughout our lives, we cannot turn back the raging currents of this polluted age; we cannot defeat devilish functions.

Our vow to work for kosen-rufu serves as a fundamental source of strength, giving us the courage to remain fearless in the face of any adversity and undaunted by any hardship. When we dedicate ourselves to this vow, then no matter what obstacles and devilish functions arise, our lives will shine with the serene, invincible spirit of champions. No matter what storms of karma assail us, our lives will glow with the indomitable spirit of the bravehearted.

As long as we never forsake our vow, no devilish function or karma will ever defeat us.

It goes without saying that when the Daishonin declares he will be the "pillar of Japan," the "eyes of Japan," and the "great ship of Japan," he is not expressing a Japan-centered worldview. Rather, he is underscoring the fact that Japan at that time could be described as a country where the entire populace was committing slander of the Law, a situation emblematic of the Latter Day. In his view, if he could free from suffering the people and nation enduring the greatest hardships in this strife-filled saha world, then he could do the same for all humanity.

Japan in the Daishonin's day was on the verge of ruin, having lost its spiritual moorings. Evil priests spreading the poison of slander of the Law filled the land, leaving the people adrift in a sea of suffering.

A house without pillars will collapse. Japan was a society without a sound spiritual foundation, teeming with negative influences, its people wandering along without purpose. In such a spiritual wasteland, Nichiren Daishonin stood up alone with the resolve: "I will become the spiritual pillar of this devastated country. I will become its eyes for distinguishing true from false amid the prevailing confusion in Buddhist thought. I will become the great ship for rescuing those who are adrift."

It is the Soka Gakkai—and, indeed, only the Soka Gakkai—that has inherited this spirit of Nichiren Daishonin.

These words of Mr. Toda, spoken shortly before he became second Soka Gakkai president, are deeply engraved in my heart: "For me there is only kosen-rufu." "I will stand up! No matter what anyone says, I will fear nothing! I'm not going to let anyone hold me back!" "I will stand up alone!"

In any time and place, efforts for kosen-rufu always begin with a stand-alone spirit. With this spirit, we can limitlessly activate the power of the Mystic Law.

From Lectures on "The Opening of the Eyes," published in Japanese in June 2006.

Section 22.6: Action Is the Hallmark of Practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism

President Ikeda explains that the Bodhisattvas of the Earth are people of action, and that the driving force of kosen-rufu lies in actively practicing and spreading the Mystic Law in the real world.

Life is not theory; it is action. The heart of Buddhism, which teaches the essence of human existence, is also found in action.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "The purpose of the appearance in this world of Shakyamuni Buddha, the lord of teachings, lies in his behavior as a human being" (WND-1, 852). This familiar passage tells us that Buddhism sought to teach proper human behavior or conduct. Right action leads to right living and embodies the correct teaching of Buddhism.

The Daishonin also states: "Without practice and study, there can be no Buddhism" (WND-1, 386). In other words, Buddhism does not exist apart from our efforts to practice its teachings ourselves and share them with others. He implies that fine words alone are not Buddhism. This is a very important, fundamental point.

In another writing, the Daishonin cites the words "You should base your mind on the ninth consciousness, and carry out your practice in the six consciousnesses" (WND-1, 458). This means we should base our minds in the purest, most fundamental life state but practice Buddhism in the real world, polishing and forging our inner selves. It stresses the importance of engaging in Buddhist practice amid the realities of this world.

Note on terminology: Concerning the nine consciousnesses, the first five relate to the five senses of sight, hearing, smell, taste, and touch. The sixth consciousness integrates the perceptions of the first five and renders them into a coherent image. The ninth, or amala-consciousness, free from all karmic impurity, is the fundamental purifying force that is the Buddha nature. The source of the quotation is unknown.

The Lotus Sutra describes the appearance of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth. Their emergence from the earth is deeply significant on many levels, but the most essential point is that they are bodhisattvas with an inherent mission from the remote past who willingly and joyously take their place among the multitude of living beings. This takes place on the deepest level of life, having nothing to do with outward authority or form.

Those who propagate the Mystic Law in the real world are the Bodhisattvas of the Earth: none other than we members of the Soka Gakkai.

The four leaders of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth are known as Superior Practices, Boundless Practices, Pure Practices, and Firmly Established Practices. The word practices is a part of each of their names. All of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth are people of action, not mere theory. Taking action with one's whole being is proof that one is a Bodhisattva of the Earth.

Without action, nothing can be built; no success or happiness can be achieved. This applies to every aspect of life and society. Criticism without action is just complaining. Complaining destroys our faith and causes us to veer off the path to happiness.

All life is in motion. The earth and the universe are in motion. Plants, animals, and all living beings are in motion. To live is to be active, to be engaged in something. And a good life is the result of good actions. A wonderful life is realized through steady right action day after day. That's why those who keep making effort, who always press on under any circumstances, are victors.

Attending meetings for kosen-rufu with an eager seeking spirit to learn something new, engaging in warmhearted dialogue with family members and people in our communities with the aim of becoming happy together—the true essence of Buddhism is alive in our daily efforts of this kind, which also shine with the benefit of the Mystic Law.

From a speech at a nationwide women's division leaders meeting, Tokyo, April 17, 1992.

Section 22.7: Awakening People to Their Mission as Bodhisattvas of the Earth

Toward the end of his novel The Human Revolution, President Ikeda touches on becoming the third Soka Gakkai president (as the character Shin'ichi Yamamoto) and recounts the noble history of the Soka Gakkai. Overcoming great hardships, the three founding presidents took on the mission of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth in their lives and went on to share it with countless ordinary people. President Ikeda reaffirms that the vow of Soka mentors and disciples—to call forth Bodhisattvas of the Earth in ever-growing numbers all around the globe—is the pivotal driving force for achieving kosen-rufu and world peace.

The death of first Soka Gakkai president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi for his beliefs and the profound awakening in prison of his disciple, Josei Toda, are two key events that have shaped the Soka Gakkai's direction.

When the head temple of Nichiren Shoshu, fearing oppression from the wartime militarist government, enshrined the Shinto talisman and transgressed Nichiren Daishonin's stern warnings against slander of the Law, Makiguchi stood up resolutely to preserve and uphold the correct teaching of Nichiren Buddhism. He called on the priesthood to remonstrate with the authorities in accord with the instructions of Nichiren Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law. He fought oppression, was arrested, and died in prison. Makiguchi truly read the Lotus Sutra with his life and carried out the work of the Thus Come One, the Buddha.

His death for his beliefs proved his selfless dedication to propagating the Law and clearly indicated that he had inherited the spirit of Nichiren Daishonin. As a result, the lifeblood of the correct teaching, then on the brink of perishing in the darkness of an age steeped in the five impurities, was preserved. The Soka Gakkai connected directly to the Daishonin and carried on the heritage of faith.

Note on terminology: The five impurities, also called five defilements, are impurity of the age, of desire, of living beings, of thought (or view), and of life span.

Toda, who had chosen Makiguchi as his mentor and faithfully followed him, was arrested and imprisoned along with him. Coursing through his being was the profound joy of having an opportunity to put his life on the line for the sake of the Law and thus reading the Lotus Sutra with his life.

After chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo continually in his prison cell, Toda came to the awakening that "the Buddha" means "life itself." At that moment, the difficult-to-understand teachings of Buddhism were revived in modern times as a life philosophy that opened the way for all people to achieve human revolution.

As he continued to chant, Toda attained a wondrous state of life. He perceived himself seated with his palms pressed together in reverence before a shimmering golden Gohonzon, participating directly in the Ceremony in the Air depicted in the Lotus Sutra and witnessing the Daishonin, as Bodhisattva Superior Practices, leader of the countless Bodhisattvas of the Earth, being entrusted by Shakyamuni Buddha with the propagation of the Law after his passing.

Note on terminology: The Ceremony in the Air is one of the three assemblies described in the Lotus Sutra, in which the entire gathering is suspended in space above the saha world. The heart of this ceremony is the revelation of the Buddha's original enlightenment in the remote past and the transfer of the essence of the sutra to the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, who are led by Bodhisattva Superior Practices.

As a deep joy and delight deriving from the Law welled up inside him, Toda perceived that, as disciples of Nichiren Daishonin, he and his mentor were Bodhisattvas of the Earth who had been entrusted with spreading the Mystic Law in the Latter Day.

The mission of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is kosen-rufu. Toda perceived the mission he had had since the remote past and for which he had been born in this world in this age.

"I now know what I must do," Toda thought. "I will never forget this day! I will devote the rest of my life to spreading this precious Law!"

This was the conclusion Toda reached on his awakening in prison, the driving force for his subsequent great achievements. He now also understood in the depths of his being the truth of the statement cited by the Daishonin in The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings that "the assembly on Holy Eagle Peak . . . continues in solemn state and has not yet disbanded" (OTT, 135). This passage from writings of the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai asserts that the assembly on Eagle Peak where Shakyamuni preaches the Lotus Sutra is eternal and never ending.

When he thought of how he had been able to reach this profound awakening as a result of following his mentor and alongside him encountering great persecution for their faith in the Mystic Law, he was filled with a sense of wonder. He also became aware that the bond he shared with his mentor, Makiguchi, was eternal, existing since the distant past as implied by the passage from "The Parable of the Phantom City" chapter of the Lotus Sutra: "Those persons who had heard the Law dwelled here and there in various Buddha lands, constantly reborn in company with their teachers" (LSOC7, 178).

But around that same time as Toda's awakening, as the frosty chill of autumn descended on Tokyo, his mentor drew his last breath in the prison infirmary.

Later, at the third memorial service for Makiguchi (commemorating the second anniversary of his death), Toda turned to his mentor's photograph on display before the altar and addressed him in tears as he fought back sobs of emotion:

"In your vast and boundless compassion, you let me accompany you even to prison. As a result, I could read with my entire being the passage from the Lotus Sutra 'Those persons who had heard the Law dwelled here and there in various Buddha lands, constantly reborn in company with their teachers.' The benefit of this was coming to know my former existence as a Bodhisattva of the Earth and to absorb with my very life even a small degree of the sutra's meaning. Could there be any greater happiness than this?"

This quote is translated from Japanese from Toda Josei zenshu (Collected Writings of Josei Toda), vol. 3, page 386.

The mentor, Makiguchi, had died in prison, leaving as a legacy his noble spirit of selfless dedication to propagating the Law. The disciple, Toda, had survived to inherit that spirit and, upon his release from prison, rose alone to the challenge of accomplishing kosen-rufu. The Soka Gakkai spirit was to be found in this shared struggle of mentor and disciple united as one, a struggle transcending the bounds of life and death.

What made the hearts of Makiguchi and Toda one? It was their powerful commitment in faith to give their lives for kosen-rufu, the realization of which was the wish of their original teacher, Nichiren Daishonin.

Shin'ichi Yamamoto deeply sensed that without a teacher like Toda, the realization of kosen-rufu, happiness for all people, and world peace would all remain elusive. In fact, Nichiren Daishonin's spirit had been inherited by just one person—Josei Toda, Makiguchi's disciple—and the vision for the future development of kosen-rufu resided in his heart.

A Buddha is not a fantastic otherworldly being. Buddhas cannot exist apart from the people. A person who spreads the Law is an emissary of the Buddha. And to protect and support such a person is to staunchly protect Buddhism.

That is why Shin'ichi had done everything he could to support and thoroughly protect his mentor. And it was through this intense struggle—concentrating millions of kalpas of effort in each moment of life (cf. OTT, 214)—that he had brought his own mission and capability to blossom. In this way, he had absorbed and embodied Toda's spirit and was approaching the same state of life his mentor had attained.

Josei Toda had awakened countless ordinary people to their mission as Bodhisattvas of the Earth. By accomplishing a Soka Gakkai membership of 750,000 households, he had demonstrated the principle for actualizing the emergence from the earth of bodhisattvas "equal in number to the sands of sixty thousand Ganges Rivers" (LSOC15, 252). His achievement amounted to fulfilling the sutra's prophecy, proof that he had directly inherited Nichiren Daishonin's spirit.

The challenge now awaiting Shin'ichi as Soka Gakkai president and heir to his mentor's legacy would be realizing this vision of numberless bodhisattvas emerging from the earth throughout the world.

When individuals awaken to their innate mission as Bodhisattvas of the Earth, it imparts to their lives a deep and essential meaning. This awareness is the pivotal driving force for human revolution—transforming people's lives, directing them toward the creation of value, and enabling them to change the most painful karma into the most wonderful mission. When individuals strive to fulfill their mission as Bodhisattvas of the Earth, they can carry out a great human revolution in their own lives, which can even go on to transform the destiny of an entire nation.

From The Human Revolution, vol. 12, "New Dawn" chapter.
