Chapter 27: The Mentor-Disciple Relationship Is the Heart of the Soka Gakkai

Section 27.1: The Mentor-Disciple Relationship Is a Sublime Spiritual Relay

Nichiren Daishonin explains: "The word shishi, or 'lion,' is made up of two elements, the first shi, which can be taken to mean a teacher, and the second shi, which can be taken to mean a disciple" (OTT, 168). Those who base their lives on the spirit of mentor and disciple are lions. The way of mentor and disciple is the very essence of Nichiren Buddhism.

To overcome every difficulty and follow through on the path of human revolution and kosen-rufu, we need to firmly embrace the mentor-disciple relationship, which is a source of endless inspiration. The Soka Gakkai's history attests to this. The noble mentor-disciple relationships shared by first Soka Gakkai president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, second president Josei Toda, and third president Daisaku Ikeda opened the great path of kosen-rufu in Japan and around the world.

This chapter contains President Ikeda's guidance discussing the importance of the mentor-disciple relationship.

The first installment features part of an interview President Ikeda gave in conjunction with the publication of a Bulgarian-language edition of his dialogue with the Bulgarian art historian and Sofia University professor Axinia Djourova. In it, he touches on the mentor-disciple relationship in general terms, stressing that it is indispensable in transmitting high ideals to future generations.

There may be many ways to view the relationship between mentor and disciple, teacher and learner, that differ from person to person, or among institutions or nations. I believe that the mentor-disciple relationship is indispensable to positively shaping nations, societies, and the times with unwavering integrity, passion, and energy.

Mentors convey to their disciples all the goals and all the good they wish to accomplish. Why? Because life is limited. We need to pass the baton on to the next generation, and again to the next, to achieve anything of enduring value.

But when those in positions of leadership, be they lawmakers, educators, businesspeople, or notable figures in various fields, fail to do this and become autocratic and self-satisfied, clinging to their own position, it creates a toxic situation. They give in to destructive behavior patterns. They grow ever more arrogant and look down on their proteges and others who seek to succeed them, ultimately bringing about their own and others' ruin.

What we need to do instead is dedicate ourselves with a spirit of humility to enabling young people, our successors, to surpass us and achieve more than we could. We need to affirm their strengths and their mission. Repeating this process is how humankind grows and develops. It is the way to positive progress. A country, an institution, a person who forgets this truth is certain to end up in unfortunate circumstances and become stuck with no way forward.

We need to give greater attention to passing on, from one generation to the next, the noble treasure of the mentor-disciple relationship, a relationship unique to human beings. We need to revive this relationship and find ways for its true expression. Otherwise, the human race will be condemned to endlessly repeating the same suffering, the same mutual antagonism, the same conflict. This is my fear. This is the result we can expect if we allow the mentor-disciple relationship to perish.

All great revolutions, whether in world history or, for example, in Japan's Meiji Restoration, came about through the joint struggles of mentors and disciples. The mentors stood up with vision and resolve, but in many cases, they were imprisoned or assassinated, or they died of illness or in battle before they could achieve their aims. The disciples inherited their mentors' aspirations and worked hard to see them to fruition. There is nothing more beautiful, more inspiring, than this spiritual relay, the passing of the baton to those who will carry on the struggle.

Without the mentor-disciple relationship, anything we undertake just ends with our own lifetime. It becomes nothing more than a small drama and a pursuit for our own self-satisfaction. In contrast, the mentor-disciple relationship enables us to live a life connected to the great flow of humanity, a life like a mighty river, a life that is part of an unending relay race.

Buddhism teaches the oneness of mentor and disciple. This is not a hierarchy, with the mentor above and the disciple below. Mentor and disciple share the same goal and advance together toward it. We also see many tales in the Buddhist scriptures in which the disciple in this lifetime is the mentor in the next.

At the same time, the mentor must show decisive leadership, or harmony is destroyed. Where the mentor is confident and resolute, things always move in a positive direction. Were that not the case, confusion would reign.

Mentors and disciples are like runners in a relay race. They are pressing ahead, passing the baton forward on the shared path of justice, happiness, and peace for all humanity. The mentors run ahead to later pass the baton to the disciples.

Nothing great can be achieved without mentors, and as such, they deserve the highest respect. Disciples put into action what they have learned from the mentor and carry on the work the mentor has left for them to accomplish in the future.

President Toda would often say that disciples should seek to excel their mentors. Only small-minded mentors demand that their disciples follow them and accept everything they say with blind obedience. Genuine mentors urge their disciples to surpass them, to accomplish what they themselves could not accomplish. And genuine disciples earnestly strive to do just that.

From an interview commemorating the publication of the Bulgarian edition of Utsukushiki shishi no tamashii (The Beauty of a Lion's Heart), published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, August 10, 2000.

Section 27.2: Mentor and Disciple Are Like a Needle and Thread

President Ikeda explains through an easy-to-grasp example that the mentor-disciple relationship is not authoritarian or hierarchical, but is the supreme way by which we can grow and develop our fullest human potential through the effort to realize a shared lofty ideal.

We need to be aware of the mentor-disciple relationship's importance in terms of awakening to and carrying out our personal mission, as well as in promoting the betterment and development of society.

For many today, the words "mentor and disciple" have a feudalistic, old-fashioned ring, but that is not how it should be.

To master anything, whether academics or sports, we need an instructor or a coach. Having a good instructor speeds our improvement and mastery. Trying to learn on our own, in contrast, often leads to much wasted effort or soon finding ourselves stuck, not knowing how to progress. In the same way, to live the most meaningful and worthwhile lives, we need a good instructor or coach, a mentor in life, who can teach us basic values and attitudes.

This relationship is not a hierarchical one of superior and inferior, nor a contractual one based on profit and payment. It is the most spontaneous and purest spiritual bond, built on a foundation of mutual trust, in which two individuals share a common purpose. It is only through this person-to-person bond that human potential is truly fostered and can develop to its fullest.

In that respect, encountering a good teacher, a great mentor, is the key to leading the best possible life. In addition, a lofty ideal can be achieved only when it is shared by a mentor and disciple, the disciple carrying on and realizing the vision articulated by the mentor.

The relationship between mentor and disciple is like that between a needle and thread. The mentor opens the way and reveals the principles, while the disciple, carrying on the mentor's work, applies, develops, and actualizes those principles. The disciple must also go on to surpass the mentor. The mentor, meanwhile, is ready to give everything, even their own life, for the sake of the disciple.

I have always pledged that it is my duty to spare no pains or efforts, to make every sacrifice, to open the way to a bright future for our young people and build the stage for their activities.

From Watakushi no ningengaku (On Historical Personalities and Society), published in Japanese in August 1988.

Section 27.3: The 10 Major Disciples of Shakyamuni

Through the example of Shakyamuni's 10 major disciples, President Ikeda outlines how making efforts to put into practice what our mentor is teaching can help us develop our individuality and ability, and actualize our potential and unique mission.

Shakyamuni had 10 major disciples. Following his guidance and instruction, they were each able, through their Buddhist practice, to develop their own unique character and qualities, which they put to use as their "weapons" in their selfless struggle to propagate Buddhism.

(1) Shariputra was known as "foremost in wisdom." Originally a follower of a non-Buddhist teacher, he joined Shakyamuni's community of practitioners along with Maudgalyayana. Shariputra was such an outstanding disciple that he was able to preach the teachings in Shakyamuni's stead, but unfortunately, he died before Shakyamuni.

(2) Mahakashyapa was known as "foremost in ascetic practices (dhuta)." He seems to have been a quiet, introverted person, but he excelled in performing certain strict disciplinary practices, so he must have been a man of stalwart character. And though he had a rather subdued personality, he played a key role in preserving the community of practitioners after Shakyamuni's death.

(3) Ananda was known as "foremost in hearing the Buddha's teachings." He was Shakyamuni's personal attendant for many years, so he heard the greatest number of his discourses. He was a genial, kindhearted, and pleasant youth who acted as an advocate for women wishing to renounce secular life and join the Buddhist Order.

(4) Subhuti was known as "foremost in understanding the doctrine of non-substantiality." He was an even-tempered individual who got along with everyone, a person of well-rounded character.

(5) Purna was known as "foremost in preaching the Law." His special quality was his eloquence.

(6) Maudgalyayana was known as "foremost in transcendental powers." One such power is the ability to travel anywhere at will. While his frequent companion Shariputra was oriented toward ideas, Maudgalyayana was an intuitive and passionate man of action.

(7) Katyayana was known as "foremost in debate." He was a precise logician who focused on debating representatives of other religions and explaining Shakyamuni's teachings.

(8) Aniruddha was known as "foremost in divine insight." On one occasion, he fell asleep while Shakyamuni was preaching, and was severely reprimanded by him. Deeply regretting his behavior, he from then on engaged in a practice to avoid sleep, taking it to such an extreme that he eventually went blind. But his loss of physical sight was compensated by his acquisition of divine insight, which afforded him incredibly deep powers of perception and judgment.

(9) Upali was known as "foremost in observing the precepts." He was from a low caste and had no special talents, but he sincerely upheld Shakyamuni's teachings. He can be seen as a representative of ordinary people.

(10) Rahula was known as "foremost in inconspicuous practice," skilled in highly meticulous and precise practice. He was the son of Shakyamuni, born before the latter renounced secular life. Rahula began practicing Buddhism at the age of 15. Though as Shakyamuni's son he faced many difficulties, he was also very perceptive and sensitive to details, which earned him the respect of all.

The 10 major disciples are described in various scriptures, and by combining those sources, we arrive at this general picture of them. As we can see, Shakyamuni succeeded in bringing the unique qualities and talents of such distinct and different individuals into full flower.

When the new Buddhist group established by the youthful Shakyamuni started out, it lacked any established organization, facilities, or public trust and acceptance. There were only the ties of mentor and disciple. This was the actual starting point of Buddhism.

Responding to Shakyamuni's message, his disciples devoted themselves to spreading his teachings. Shakyamuni had his followers engage in propagation soon after they joined his group. He instructed them to go forth alone and preach the Law, to embark on their journey of propagation immediately.

Spreading the teachings encompasses all forms of practice in Buddhism. There is no better way to forge character. If we neglect this basic practice of sharing the teachings, we cannot cultivate ourselves as human beings.

All too often when leaders fail to grow as individuals, they resort to using the power of the organization to manipulate the members. This is where the corruption of the organization starts.

Making continuous, dedicated efforts in propagation is the lifeblood of Buddhism. This is Shakyamuni's teaching and the direct path to attaining Buddhahood that Nichiren Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, taught his followers at the risk of his life.

The 10 major disciples didn't set limits on their practice. By throwing themselves heart and soul into their practice and working hard to build the Buddhist Order, they honed their unique qualities and developed their personal skills and fortes.

They engaged in a ceaseless struggle to find ways to put into practice their mentor's teachings, which they had etched in their beings. For disciples striving to respond to and apply what their mentor taught them, every instant was an earnest struggle, a battle for the sake of the Law from which they refused to retreat a single step.

At the same time, the teacher, by providing opportunities for the disciples to take action, gains a full understanding of their potential and abilities. These are things that are not always obvious through superficial observation.

Only after training and testing ourselves to the limit do we succeed in revealing our true intrinsic nature, making the diamond of our unique personality sparkle from the depths of our lives. It is impossible to fully develop our humanity in the realms of politics or business, and even education has its limits. This is the profound significance of our practice of Nichiren Buddhism, which enables us to polish our lives at the most fundamental level.

From a speech at a youth division leaders meeting, Tokyo, April 20, 1990.

Section 27.4: The Mentor-Disciple Relationship Is the Cornerstone of Nichiren Buddhism

Citing passages from Nichiren Daishonin's writings, President Ikeda explains that the unity of mentor and disciple is key to ensuring the eternal flow of kosen-rufu.

What is the most important requirement for advancing together in the unity of "many in body, one in mind"? It is for each of us to make the oneness of mentor and disciple the center of our lives. Sharing the same heart and spirit as our mentor is the key to us, a gathering of diverse individuals, uniting in a single purpose and thereby embodying the spirit of "many in body, one in mind."

To the Ikegami brothers, disciples who were exerting themselves in their Buddhist practice amid challenging circumstances, the Daishonin instructs: "Though I may seem presumptuous in saying so, you should join together in paying honor to Nichiren. If the two of you should fail to act in harmony, then you may be sure that you will cease to enjoy the protection of [the Buddhas and heavenly deities]" (WND-2, 914).

Aligning our hearts with our mentor and deepening our determination to advance kosen-rufu are key to achieving solid unity in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind." It is through such unity that we can activate the true brilliant power of the Mystic Law.

I'd like to share with you some other passages from the Daishonin's writings:

"Those who call themselves my disciples and practice the Lotus Sutra should all practice as I do. If they do, Shakyamuni, Many Treasures, Shakyamuni's emanations throughout the ten directions, and the ten demon daughters will protect them." (WND-1, 978)

Note on terminology: The ten demon daughters are the 10 female protective deities who appear in the "Dharani" chapter of the Lotus Sutra as the "daughters of rakshasa demons" or the "ten rakshasa daughters." They vow to the Buddha to guard and protect the sutra's practitioners.

"[The Lotus Sutra states:] 'If one stays close to the teachers of the Law, one will speedily gain the way of enlightenment. By following and learning from these teachers one will see Buddhas as numerous as Ganges sands'" [cf. LSOC10, 208]. (WND-2, 375)

"If lay believers and their teacher pray with differing minds, their prayers will be as futile as trying to kindle a fire on water." (WND-1, 795)

"To forget the original teacher who had brought one the water of wisdom from the great ocean of the Lotus Sutra and instead follow another would surely cause one to sink into the endless sufferings of birth and death." (WND-1, 747)

As these golden words indicate, the mentor-disciple relationship is an important cornerstone of Nichiren Buddhism.

The Daishonin's direct disciple and successor, Nikko Shonin, writes: "In the teaching of the Daishonin, one attains Buddhahood by correctly following the path of mentor and disciple. If one errs even slightly in the path of mentor and disciple, then though one may uphold the Lotus Sutra, one will fall into the hell of incessant suffering." This is from Nikko's "Reply to Believers in Sado Province," found in Kamakura ibun (Documents of the Kamakura Period), compiled and edited by Rizo Takeuchi.

Striving in faith with the same spirit as the mentor is fundamental to attaining Buddhahood. It is also the great path for ensuring the eternal flow of kosen-rufu.

As I have said many times in the past, the spirit of oneness of mentor and disciple is the decisive factor that separates Nikko Shonin from the five senior priests who betrayed the Daishonin.

Note on terminology: The five senior priests are five of the six senior priests designated by Nichiren Daishonin as his principal disciples, but who betrayed his teachings after his death. Nikko Shonin was the only one among these original six senior disciples to correctly carry on the Daishonin's Buddhism.

Nikko Shonin proudly called himself a disciple of Nichiren Daishonin, whom he properly revered as the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law. In contrast, the five senior priests, fearing persecution and seeking to curry favor with the authorities, foolishly called themselves priests of the Tendai school.

Moreover, the five senior priests burned or otherwise destroyed items that they were embarrassed or ashamed to have associated with their mentor, such as letters that the Daishonin had written to ordinary people in common, everyday language. Nikko Shonin alone carefully preserved the Daishonin's vernacular writings, convinced that at some time in the future they would be translated and transmitted abroad to China, India, and the world at large (cf. GZ, 1613 [GZ, new ed., 2190]).

Note: Buddhist teachers of the day wrote almost exclusively in classical Chinese, whereas the Daishonin often used ordinary Japanese, text with Japanese phonetic script mixed in to make it accessible to non-scholars. This caused those disciples who were concerned about their reputation in the eyes of others to try to distance themselves from such vernacular works by their teacher. Ultimately, they revealed themselves as elitists who looked down on their teacher's compassionate efforts to encourage ordinary people.

The unmistakable difference here lies in the fact that Nikko Shonin faithfully upheld the spirit of oneness of mentor and disciple, while the five senior priests did not.

Kosen-rufu is possible when disciples embrace the same spirit as their mentor. Without the solid pillar of the mentor-disciple relationship, it is all too easy to be swayed by one's own emotions and the trends of the times, and one will readily cave in and give up when one's faith is challenged.

For more than five decades after the Daishonin's passing, Nikko Shonin carried on the solemn struggle of oneness of mentor and disciple. Through his fierce determination to refute the erroneous and reveal the true, he utterly demolished the false assertions of the five senior priests.

Fifty years have passed since Mr. Toda's death [on April 2, 1958]. I am confident beyond a shadow of doubt that through my efforts as his direct disciple, I have established an enduring model of what it means to follow the path of a disciple, the path of a successor, and the path of oneness of mentor and disciple.

From a speech at a Tokyo Number 2 Area executive leaders conference, Tokyo, April 5, 2008.

Section 27.5: Walking the Path of a Disciple throughout One's Life

Referring to Nichiren Daishonin's conviction that Buddhism in Japan had degenerated because it had strayed from the path of mentor and disciple, President Ikeda declares that the Soka Gakkai and its first three presidents have widely opened the way for kosen-rufu by faithfully following the path of mentor and disciple.

Nichiren Daishonin clearly asserted that Buddhism in Japan had become corrupt and degenerate because disciples failed to respect and follow their mentors.

The Great Teacher Dengyo of Japan established the head temple of the Tendai school of Buddhism at Mount Hiei, which became the center of Japanese Buddhism for many centuries. However, Dengyo's successors were influenced by the growing popularity of the True Word teachings [that had in recent years entered the country from China] and decided to incorporate them into the doctrine of the Tendai school [which was originally based on the Lotus Sutra].

Referring to one of Dengyo's successors, the Daishonin writes: "He [Jikaku] felt that his teacher, the Great Teacher Dengyo, had not gone into the matter in sufficient detail, that he had not remained for an extended period in China [to study Buddhism] and hence had acquired only a rough understanding of the True Word doctrines" (WND-1, 570).

In other words, these later successors thought: "We know better than Dengyo. We have studied more than him. Our mentor doesn't get it." These were their sentiments. It was a sign of the purest arrogance. They turned their backs on their teacher Dengyo and allowed themselves to be swayed by the popularity of the True Word teachings.

But Dengyo had, in fact, denounced the True Word teachings based on a full and complete understanding of them. This is an important point. The Daishonin outlines this history in "The Selection of the Time."

Because Dengyo's successors failed to grasp the greatness of their mentor, Mount Hiei degenerated into a center of the True Word teachings. The Daishonin says that they "acted as archenemies of the founder of their school, the Great Teacher Dengyo" (WND-2, 793).

At the very time they should have been refuting these erroneous teachings, Dengyo's disciples neglected to do so. Finding fault with their mentor, they justified their actions as right and proper, and so avoided confrontation and possible persecution. These disciples were cunning and self-serving.

Looking back at the T'ien-t'ai school in China, we can see that the same thing happened. After the death of the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai, the school's founder, new scriptures arrived in China from India. Naturally, T'ien-t'ai had not known of these scriptures and, as such, hadn't specifically rejected them. His disciples later misguidedly embraced the erroneous view that these scriptures were superior to the Lotus Sutra [on which the T'ien-t'ai school had originally been based].

[For instance, in "On Repaying Debts of Gratitude," the Daishonin writes: "Since this was a text that T'ien-t'ai had never seen, his followers in these later times, shallow as they were in wisdom and understanding, seemed inclined to accept this allegation (of its superiority over the Lotus Sutra)" (WND-1, 700).]

In "On Repaying Debts of Gratitude," the Daishonin declares these disciples to have been foolish and cowardly, ignorant of their teacher's greatness and unable to properly promote his teachings. This, he says, led to the pure flow of the correct teaching of Buddhism being polluted.

While enjoying the respect they received from people because of the authority of their teacher, in their hearts they disdained their teacher and refused to fight against falsehood, and even worse, came to adopt those falsehoods as their own beliefs.

Those who fail to challenge error are tainted by it. Similarly, those who fail to fight against the devilish nature of authority fall victim to it themselves.

We find this principle clearly stated in the Daishonin's writings. This process of such degeneration in the realm of Buddhism is not restricted to the past. That is why it is crucial for us to carefully read the Daishonin's writings today.

It would be a terrible calamity if the spirit of our first two presidents, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi and Josei Toda, were to disappear from the Soka Gakkai. We would no longer be able to carry out kosen-rufu. We would have completely betrayed our mentors and the Daishonin.

That is why I am taking decisive leadership for our movement and teaching our members the mentor-disciple spirit, determined to live on and press forward undefeated through all.

There were arrogant disciples during the Daishonin's lifetime, too. They criticized him, saying he invited persecution on himself because of his ill-advised approach. These disciples didn't understand that being persecuted in spite of one's innocence proves that one is a genuine practitioner of the Lotus Sutra.

Such people, the Daishonin says, are truly unfortunate, because they will remain in the life state of hell and suffer even more than those of other Buddhist schools of the day who slandered the Lotus Sutra. He writes: "They not only have forsaken the Lotus Sutra, but also actually think themselves wise enough to instruct me. The pitiful thing is that these perverse people must suffer in the Avichi hell even longer than the Nembutsu believers" (WND-1, 306).

Note on terminology: Avichi hell is the hell of incessant suffering.

Such is the gravity of the offense of betraying the path of mentor and disciple. This is the case of the Nichiren Shoshu priesthood under Nikken Abe, which completely ignores not only the Daishonin and Nikko Shonin but all the successive teachers of the school. It is concerned only with its own welfare. The Daishonin's Buddhism no longer exists within the priesthood, which has turned its back on the path of mentor and disciple and become the archenemy of the Daishonin.

In November 1941, a month before the outbreak of World War II, when Japan was swept up in a tempest of militaristic nationalism, Mr. Toda delivered a lecture titled "The Path of a Disciple." In it, he described the path of the disciple as follows:

"Nikko Shonin had not the slightest desire to outshine Nichiren Daishonin. Likewise, our duty is to faithfully follow, put into practice, and apply to our daily lives President Makiguchi's teaching. . . . Mr. Makiguchi is our mentor and we are his disciples. . . . What point can there possibly be in merely imitating his manner of speaking? We would be casting away the precious essence of his spirit. . . . Disciples have to follow the path of a disciple. Both in word and deed, we have to give expression to the mentor's teaching in our lives."

This quote is from Toda Josei zenshu (Collected Writings of Josei Toda), volume 3.

This is Mr. Toda's message to us. It may seem simple, but when the Soka Gakkai was persecuted during World War II, Mr. Toda was the only one who put it into practice. Mr. Makiguchi's other disciples not only abandoned their beliefs, but spoke ill of Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda.

The fickleness of the human heart is frightening. These disciples denounced their mentor to protect themselves. Their faith was false and their spirits base and corrupt.

While all the other disciples of President Makiguchi disappeared, Mr. Toda remained true to his beliefs and even went so far as to declare, at the third memorial [second anniversary] of his mentor's death:

"In your vast and boundless compassion, you let me accompany you even to prison. As a result, I could read with my entire being the passage from the Lotus Sutra: 'Those persons who had heard the Law dwelled here and there in various Buddha lands, constantly reborn in company with their teachers' (LSOC7, 178). The benefit of this was coming to know my former existence as a Bodhisattva of the Earth, and to absorb with my very life even a small degree of the sutra's meaning. Could there be any greater happiness than this."

What a noble pronouncement! This is the ultimate expression of the Soka Gakkai path of mentor and disciple and the path of Nichiren Buddhism. In the starkest possible contrast to Mr. Makiguchi's other disciples, Mr. Toda regarded it as a great honor to undergo persecution with his mentor.

Difficulties are to be expected when we propagate the correct teaching of Buddhism. The Lotus Sutra teaches in the "Encouraging Devotion" chapter: "There will be many ignorant people who will curse and speak ill of us" (LSOC13, 232). The Daishonin also stresses this time and again in his writings.

Yet despite this, there are those who, when difficulties occur, are terrified of coming under attack and malign the mentor to whom they owe such a great debt of gratitude. They may use their mentor as a shield as they try to avoid being attacked themselves. This is despicable in the extreme.

I also was alone in supporting Mr. Toda. As his disciple, I did everything I possibly could to assist him. The Soka Gakkai tradition of making February a month of renewed efforts to share Nichiren Buddhism all began from my determination to respond to my mentor.

Note on terminology: This refers to the February Campaign. In February 1952, President Ikeda, then an adviser to Tokyo's Kamata Chapter, initiated a dynamic propagation campaign. Together with the Kamata members, he broke through the previous monthly record of some 100 new member households by introducing Nichiren Buddhism to 201 new member households.

In early 1952, although Mr. Toda had become president the previous year, the Soka Gakkai wasn't making much progress in its propagation efforts. Other leaders senior to me in years of faith and practice made grand statements, but could produce no concrete results. That's when Mr. Toda decided it was time to set me to this task.

It was a solemn request from my mentor. I agreed without hesitation and, embracing his spirit as my own, launched into action. I quickly broke through the stalemate in propagation and opened the way forward. That was how the great path of kosen-rufu leading to the present was blazed. Mr. Toda used to say that if he called on me, he knew he could sit back and relax. He knew that I would definitely succeed. He had confidence in me. This spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple is the essence of the Soka Gakkai.

I have placed my complete trust in Nichiren Daishonin and Mr. Toda. The Gohonzon, Mr. Toda, and sincerity are my three treasures. I have always won through sincerity.

While living my life with integrity, dedicated to the noblest cause, I have been criticized and disparaged without end. But I have triumphed through my Buddhist faith and practice. I have triumphed as a human being. I am confident that from the perspective of Buddhism and the three existences of past, present, and future, I am the greatest victor of all.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, February 3, 1998.

Section 27.6: What Defines a Good Teacher in Buddhism?

Citing a passage from the writings of Nichiren Daishonin, President Ikeda clarifies that a good and correct teacher in Buddhism is one who strives to open the way for the widespread propagation of the Law even amid hardship and opposition.

I would now like to refer to one of the Daishonin's writings. A passage in "Reply to Sairen-bo" states:

"One should understand that, at present, when it comes to teachers, there is a difference between correct teachers and erroneous teachers, between good teachers and bad teachers. One should shun those who are erroneous or evil, and associate with those who are correct and good." (WND-1, 310)

When it comes to teachers, there are both good and bad. "Seek out good teachers! Avoid bad teachers! Have the wisdom to tell the difference between the two. Don't be deceived!" This is the Daishonin's solemn instruction. We mustn't follow erroneous teachers; if we do, we will be negatively influenced by their erroneous ways.

Who, then, is the correct teacher we should seek? It is the person who chants and spreads the Mystic Law with selfless dedication while battling the three powerful enemies of Buddhism.

Note on terminology: The three powerful enemies are three types of arrogant people who persecute those who propagate the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni Buddha's death, described in the concluding verse section of the "Encouraging Devotion" (13th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The Great Teacher Miao-lo of China summarizes them as arrogant lay people, arrogant priests, and arrogant false sages.

Correct teachers of the Law can be identified by whether they have encountered hardships and opposition just like those described in the Lotus Sutra. This is the Daishonin's key focus. Thus, he criticizes the proponents of various schools who spuriously claim that they "beyond all others have grasped the meaning of and are practicing the Lotus Sutra" (cf. WND-1, 311). In particular, he points out that not a single one of them has undergone the kind of harsh persecution that he has.

The Daishonin's life was truly a series of persecutions. Based on malicious false accusations, he was sent into exile twice and nearly executed. He was attacked many times and faced countless other hardships. All of this was in exact accord with the Lotus Sutra.

Therefore, the Daishonin says that the proponents of the other schools, who put on airs but are strangers to persecution, are all erroneous teachers. And he insists that he alone should be considered the correct teacher because he has endured unremitting persecution (cf. WND-1, 311).

Who has directly inherited the spirit of Nichiren Daishonin and opened the way for worldwide kosen-rufu in this corrupt Latter Day of the Law? And who, in doing so, has encountered slander and abuse, hatred and jealousy even more intense than during the Buddha's lifetime, as the Lotus Sutra predicts (cf. LSOC13, 232; LSOC10, 203)? It is none but the first three presidents of the Soka Gakkai, linked by the bonds of mentor and disciple.

Founding president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi was put in prison for his efforts to protect the lifeblood of the correct teachings and doctrines of Nichiren Daishonin, and he died there, a martyr to his beliefs. Second president Josei Toda was also imprisoned. He survived two years of intense interrogation and harrowing conditions behind bars, an ordeal that ultimately shortened his life. And as third president, I, too, was jailed on false charges. I have been showered with unending slander and abuse, most of it fueled by treacherous former Soka Gakkai members whose blatant lies were seized on and spread by a sensationalist tabloid press.

All of the obstacles Mr. Makiguchi, Mr. Toda, and I have encountered are in perfect accord with the Lotus Sutra and the Daishonin's writings. Only we, the first three presidents, have borne the full brunt of persecution and attack. Only we have fought against the three obstacles and four devils and the three powerful enemies, without the slightest deviation from the Daishonin's teachings. This is something all of you know better than anyone.

Note on terminology: The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are (1) the obstacle of earthly desires, (2) the obstacle of karma, and (3) the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are (1) the hindrance of the five components, (2) the hindrance of earthly desires, (3) the hindrance of death, and (4) the hindrance of the devil king.

Mr. Toda thoroughly trained me, and always made me feel valued and appreciated. When his businesses failed and he was plunged into a life-and-death crisis, I single-handedly did all I could to support and assist him. I cleared the huge mountain of debt he had incurred. If someone dared malign my mentor, I would immediately go out to confront them on my own. Irrespective of who they were, I would address them with the courage, sincerity, and directness of youth, tenaciously setting the record straight until they recognized they were wrong about Mr. Toda.

The very essence of the mentor-disciple relationship in Nichiren Buddhism is found in the disciple's prayers and efforts to firmly support the mentor in times of adversity.

Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda were of one heart and mind; so were Mr. Toda and I. Our mentor-disciple bonds transcend life and death. Heir to the true spirit of Mr. Toda, I fought against the three powerful enemies and built the Soka Gakkai into the great organization that it is today. My two predecessors and I have laid the Soka path of mentor and disciple. The mentor-disciple spirit of the first three presidents is the foundation. As long as the Soka Gakkai carries on this spirit, it will continue to develop and thrive forever and succeed in realizing worldwide kosen-rufu.

I would like you, my successors in the youth division, to inherit the first three presidents' fighting spirit for kosen-rufu and win in all your endeavors without fail. I'm counting on you!

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, March 9, 2006.

Section 27.7: Having a Mentor in One's Heart

Throughout his novel The New Human Revolution, President Ikeda touches on the profound nature of the mentor-disciple relationship. The excerpted passages below describe how the novel's protagonist, Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda), has opened the way for kosen-rufu while cherishing his mentor, Josei Toda, in his heart and carrying on an internal dialogue with him.

[In response to a young man who at a leaders meeting asks what they should bear in mind in their efforts to make the Soka Gakkai's movement more open to society.]

Shin'ichi answered unhesitatingly: "Walk the path of mentor and disciple."

Watching the young man's reaction, he continued: "You're wondering what mentor and disciple has to do with it, aren't you? It's like the relationship between centrifugal (outward) and centripetal (inward) forces in rotational motion.

"Developing a movement that widely spreads the ideals of Buddhism into society is like a centrifugal, or outward, force. The stronger this centrifugal force becomes, the more important it is to have a powerful centripetal, or inward, force directed toward the teachings of Buddhism. And the source of that centripetal force is the spirit of oneness of mentor and disciple.

"In recent years, youth division members have brimmed with the spirit to show victorious actual proof of their Buddhist practice in society and have gradually become more aware of the importance of social contribution. That's a wonderful thing. But if you forget the fundamental goal of kosen-rufu and become obsessed with achieving personal renown and success, you can easily end up making light of the realm of faith. And, if you start to judge others based on their social status or position and look down on people, you'll have defeated the entire purpose.

"The way of mentor and disciple is crucial to walking the true path of humanity and Buddhism."

The mentor-disciple relationship in Buddhism starts with the compassion of Shakyamuni Buddha to teach his disciples the path to enlightenment and the seeking spirit of his disciples to understand his teaching. In short, it is a spiritual bond that depends on the self-motivated will of the disciple. This is also clear when we look at the relationship between Nichiren Daishonin and his direct disciple and successor, Nikko Shonin.

The way of mentor and disciple is strict. Nowhere else can we find the great path of human revolution and attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Shin'ichi strongly recounted to the young people: "I also dedicated myself wholeheartedly to Mr. Toda, supported him, and have done my best to fulfill my mission as his disciple. I always achieved the goals he set, showing actual proof of victory. Had I allowed myself to be defeated, his plans would have come to naught, and I would, in effect, have been betraying my mentor.

"In his final years, Mr. Toda said to me: 'Shin'ichi, you've achieved everything I asked. You even took seriously things I said half-jokingly and brought them to fruition. I don't trust people who are all talk. What matters are the actions one takes. With you here, I know I have nothing to worry about.'

"Those words are my greatest source of pride. They describe what it means to be a genuine disciple. I am always talking with Mr. Toda in my heart. I am always asking myself what he would do in any given situation, what he would say to me if he saw what I am doing. A mentor is a role model for your entire life."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 17, "Main Bastion" chapter.

[Reminiscing about the challenging time in 1950, when the economic turmoil of postwar Japan adversely affected Josei Toda's businesses]

Shin'ichi worked, strove, and fought with the unwavering wish to triumph in every endeavor so that he might bring joy to his mentor, Josei Toda. His mentor was always in his heart. Each day, each moment, was an ongoing dialogue with him. Shin'ichi was also convinced that Toda was aware of all his efforts and of what was deep in his heart. He was determined to be a person who could at any time report proudly to his mentor.

As he chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo each morning, he inwardly vowed: "Sensei! I will do my very best again today! I'll win for you without fail! Please watch me as I take action as a true and faithful disciple!"

The winds that buffeted Toda and Shin'ichi, however, were fierce and bitterly cold. Shin'ichi was also ill with tuberculosis and had a constant fever. There were nights when he agonized over the daunting walls of difficulty that blocked their way. At such times, Toda's stern words rang out in his heart: "Now is decisive! Don't be defeated! Be confident and boldly press ahead! You're my disciple, after all! You're the cub of a lion king!"

Whenever Shin'ichi thought of his mentor, he felt a fresh surge of courage and strength.

On days when he fought to the best of his ability, he pictured Toda smiling and saying: "Excellent! Well done!"

Shin'ichi saw any laziness and compromise on his part not only as a personal failure but also as something that would sadden and disappoint his mentor.

The mentor-disciple relationship is not a mere formality. It comes to life when we constantly have our mentor in our hearts. That is the key to developing self-mastery and real self-reliance.

From The New Human Revolution, volume 22, "A New Century" chapter.

The oneness of mentor and disciple means living with the same spirit as our mentor, and it starts with always having our mentor firmly in our hearts.

We can stress the importance of walking the path of mentor and disciple all we like, but if we fail to internalize our mentor's spirit, we are not genuinely practicing Buddhism. And if we view our mentor as existing apart from us, as someone beyond our reach, then the mentor's conduct and teachings cannot serve as an internal guide. We may take how our mentor views or appraises us as the standard for our behavior. If that happens, we may give in to the sly tendency to strive hard when our mentor tells us to but slacken our efforts when left to our own devices. Then we can neither deepen our faith nor carry out our human revolution.

If leaders, especially, fall prey to this tendency, they will extinguish the true spirit of Buddhism. The pure realm of faith will then become a realm of worldly concerns ruled by personal advantage and calculation.

Only by firmly establishing the great path of the oneness of mentor and disciple in our hearts can we ensure the eternal transmission of the Law.

From The New Human Revolution, volume 25, "Bastion of Capable People" chapter.

Section 27.8: The Disciples Are Key

Speaking to youth, President Ikeda explains that the way of mentor and disciple is the path of Buddhism and the path of the Soka Gakkai, and that it ultimately depends on the efforts of the disciples.

Even in the midst of persecution, founding Soka Gakkai president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, a great lion king of faith who gave his life for his beliefs, often declared that a steady stream of young people was certain to follow in his footsteps.

Mr. Toda succeeded Mr. Makiguchi, and I carried on from Mr. Toda. Now, I have you, millions of young successors. I am confident that you will carry on after me. Please continue to resolutely follow this path of lions, the path of mentor and disciple, while forging ever stronger and deeper bonds of unity.

The mentor-disciple relationship is the essence of Nichiren Buddhism and the heart of the Soka Gakkai spirit.

In his well-known writing "Flowering and Bearing Grain," the Daishonin says: "If a teacher has a good disciple, both will gain the fruit of Buddhahood, but if a teacher fosters a bad disciple, both will fall into hell. If teacher and disciple are of different minds, they will never accomplish anything" (WND-1, 909). In other words, the mentor-disciple relationship ultimately hinges on the commitment and actions of the disciple.

As third Soka Gakkai president, I accomplished all the goals and visions of Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda. Taking on the brunt of all persecution, I fought to the end, and I triumphed. This is my greatest pride. Now, I must entrust the future to you. It is your turn, members of the youth division!

From a speech at a nationwide youth division leaders meeting, Tokyo, January 17, 1998.
