Chapter 19: Making the Writings of Nichiren Daishonin Our Foundation

Section 19.1: Three Key Reasons Why Buddhist Study Is Important

Human revolution means putting into practice the life-affirming principles and philosophy elucidated in the writings of Nichiren Daishonin.

In the "Launching Out" chapter in volume 30 of his novel The New Human Revolution, President Ikeda explains that our purpose in studying the principles of Nichiren Buddhism is "to deepen our faith, attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, and advance kosen-rufu." He writes: "Buddhist study in the Soka Gakkai is practice-oriented study, delving into the principles of life for creating happiness for ourselves and others."

This chapter features excerpts in which President Ikeda stresses the importance of Buddhist study to strengthen our practice and inspire us in our efforts to promote our movement for kosen-rufu.

In the first selection, he clarifies these points for the youth.

Nichiren Buddhism is an unsurpassed philosophy for fostering people of unsurpassed humanity. The passion and power of young people who uphold this priceless philosophy will create a new age.

Why is it important for youth to study the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism? There are numerous reasons, but I think they can be summed up in the following three points.

First, Buddhist study helps us deepen our faith.

I will never forget President Toda speaking with intense regret about the fact that a majority of the Soka Gakkai's members abandoned their faith when faced with oppression by the Japanese militarist authorities during World War II. "Not having a solid grounding in Buddhist study," he said, "they failed to grasp the essence of Nichiren Buddhism. They grew fainthearted and were defeated by persecution. It's truly regrettable. A mistake I won't let happen again."

Buddhist study is a beacon illuminating the path of faith. Even the complex workings of negative forces that arise to assail us are clearly revealed for what they are in the bright mirror of the Buddhist teachings.

Indeed, studying the principles of Buddhism enables us to build our own solid foundation of faith and becomes a power source for our human revolution. For that reason, when Mr. Toda set about rebuilding the Soka Gakkai based on Buddhist study, he began by giving a series of lectures on the Lotus Sutra.

Second, Buddhist study serves as a driving force for kosen-rufu.

The Daishonin's writings present the correct teaching of Nichiren Buddhism and the path of propagation based on "refuting the erroneous and revealing the true." They also fully describe the attitude in faith essential to realizing kosen-rufu, as well as the way to conduct oneself as a Buddhist leader and the key elements in fostering capable individuals.

To study the writings of Nichiren Daishonin is to come into contact with his spirit; it is to receive powerful encouragement directly from the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, as well as guidelines for the promotion of kosen-rufu.

We can only be said to have truly studied Nichiren Buddhism when we take action in accord with the Daishonin's writings. There is no genuine Buddhist study without practice. And when we put the teachings into practice, limitless courage wells forth in our lives and we can display boundless ability and strength.

Third, Buddhist study lays the foundation for establishing a new humanism.

Our times are rife with serious challenges, including the threat of nuclear war, ethnic conflict, environmental problems, failing education systems, and other social issues. Though people long for happiness and world peace, things just grow more chaotic and confused. This results from the lack of a sound life philosophy.

I believe the teachings of Buddhism alone can shine a light on these problems. Only by grounding ourselves in such Buddhist principles as respect and compassion for life, the oneness of body and mind, and the oneness of living beings and their environment can we open the way to a new humanism. Mr. Toda's Declaration Calling for the Abolition of Nuclear Weapons was also an expression of the life-affirming principles of Buddhism.

It was Mr. Toda's conviction that there can be no bright future for humanity unless the youth division members who will shoulder responsibility for the 21st century gain a deep understanding of the philosophy of Nichiren Buddhism, the world's supreme teaching that can enable all humanity to attain happiness. He was confident that young people who embraced this great philosophy would go on to become world leaders in every field of human endeavor.

Mr. Toda always approached the study of Buddhism with the kind of intensity and rigor with which a master swordsman practices his art. On one occasion, he had gone to Osaka to give a lecture. He felt so ill, however, that he instructed a study department leader to get ready to take his place. But when the evening of the lecture arrived, he rose from his bed and announced:

"I'll give the lecture after all. The 'Life Span' chapter of the Lotus Sutra states: 'This, a Buddha's work, I have never for a moment neglected' (LSOC16, 267). The Buddha never rests in his efforts to alleviate the sufferings of the people. I've traveled all the way here to give this lecture—I can't just ask someone to take my place. Even if I die giving it, I'll have no regrets."

My mentor's death-defying determination taught me just how solemn is the responsibility of transmitting the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism.

In my youth, I studied the Daishonin's writings thoroughly, to the extent that I actually committed many of his major writings to memory. That effort has built a foundation that has stood me well for my entire life.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, August 19, 1998.

Section 19.2: Buddhist Study to Deepen Understanding Based on Faith

Referring to President Toda's insight that one can either focus on an academic approach to studying Nichiren Buddhism or strive to deepen understanding of the teachings based on faith, President Ikeda stresses the importance of reading the Daishonin's writings within the context of our own lives and engraving their lessons in our innermost beings.

To open the writings of Nichiren Daishonin each day, to read them and study them—this is the way for us to always live and strive together with the Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law.

In a letter to Nanjo Tokimitsu's mother—the lay nun Ueno, who was left to raise her children on her own after her husband's untimely death—the Daishonin writes:

"Neither the pure land nor hell exists outside oneself; both lie only within one's own heart. Awakened to this, one is called a Buddha; deluded about it, one is called an ordinary person. The Lotus Sutra reveals this truth, and one who embraces the Lotus Sutra will realize that hell is itself the Land of Tranquil Light." (WND-1, 456)

Note on terminology: Land of Tranquil Light, also called Land of Eternally Tranquil Light, is the Buddha land, which is free from impermanence and impurity. In many sutras, the actual saha world in which human beings dwell is described as an impure land filled with delusions and sufferings, while the Buddha land is described as a pure land free from these and far removed from this saha world. In contrast, the Lotus Sutra reveals the saha world to be the Buddha land, or the Land of Eternally Tranquil Light, and explains that the nature of a land is determined by the minds of its inhabitants.

One of the truly great things about the Daishonin's Buddhism is that it presents life's most profound principles in clear and simple terms.

No matter what hellish suffering we may be experiencing, we can still bring forth the life state of Buddhahood from within us. When we resolutely chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we are able to create a "Capital of Tranquil Light"—a realm pervaded with Buddhahood—right where we are, in the midst of the reality in which we presently find ourselves. Each of us without exception can develop an eternal and indestructible state of happiness for ourselves and help others do the same.

That is the purpose of faith and also Buddhist study.

Through the example of Shakyamuni's disciples Chudapanthaka and Devadatta, the Daishonin offers a solemn warning:

"Chudapanthaka was unable to memorize a teaching of fourteen characters even in the space of three years, and yet he attained Buddhahood. Devadatta, on the other hand, had committed to memory sixty thousand teachings but fell into the hell of incessant suffering." (WND-1, 602)

Chudapanthaka, who was regarded as slow-witted, persevered with sincere devotion as a disciple of the Buddha and ultimately attained enlightenment, whereas Devadatta, who was acquainted with a vast number of Shakyamuni's teachings, eventually betrayed the Buddha and fell into the hell of incessant suffering.

In other words, just because one is good at Buddhist study doesn't make one superior or special. After all, being knowledgeable about Buddhism is no different from being knowledgeable about any other subject and is not the same as having faith. Unfortunately, there have in the past been foolish and arrogant leaders in the Soka Gakkai who, though making a great display of their knowledge of Buddhist doctrine, ended up discarding their faith and turning against the organization and their fellow members.

As practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism, our ultimate goals are attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime and realizing kosen-rufu. The only way to achieve those goals is to employ the "strategy of the Lotus Sutra" (WND-1, 1001) and navigate our way through the stormy seas of life with an unwavering commitment to faith.

The purpose of Buddhist study is so that we can develop into truly exemplary practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism, courageous champions of faith and practice. We must never err on this point.

Mr. Toda said that there are two kinds of Buddhist study—one that focuses on an academic approach and the other in which we strive to deepen our understanding of the teachings through faith. United together in spirit as mentor and disciple, Mr. Toda and I based all our activities for kosen-rufu on the latter kind. This is why the Soka Gakkai has triumphed. Through studying the Daishonin's teachings while actively putting them into action, our members have achieved one brilliant victory after another.

In the Daishonin's writings, we can find boundless hope, courage, and promise. They help us bring forth our inner wisdom for winning in life, deepen our conviction in the power of the Mystic Law, and ignite our fighting spirit. Applying the Daishonin's writings to our daily lives—"reading" them with our lives—enables us to wield the "sharp sword" of faith that can cut through all obstacles and make the impossible possible.

At the kickoff for the Osaka Campaign of 1956—which led to achieving the seemingly impossible—the Kansai members and I read the following passage from the Daishonin's writings together:

"I am praying that, no matter how troubled the times may become, the Lotus Sutra and the ten demon daughters [guardian deities of Buddhism] will protect all of you, praying as earnestly as though to produce fire from damp wood, or to obtain water from parched ground." (WND-1, 444)

Note on terminology: The Osaka Campaign was in May 1956, when the Kansai members, uniting around a young Daisaku Ikeda, who had been dispatched by second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda to support them, introduced 11,111 households to the practice of the Daishonin's Buddhism. In elections held two months later, the Soka Gakkai-backed candidate in Kansai won a seat in the Upper House, an accomplishment that was thought all but impossible at the time.

Note on terminology: The ten demon daughters are the ten female protective deities who appear in the "Dharani" (26th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra as the "daughters of rakshasa demons" or the "ten rakshasa daughters." They vow to the Buddha to guard and protect the sutra's practitioners.

Engraving these golden words in our lives, we embarked on our propagation campaign amid turbulent times with strong faith and confident prayer.

To encourage members who were struggling with work or financial hardship, I would share the Daishonin's words: "Those who believe in the Lotus Sutra are as if in winter, but winter always turns to spring" (WND-1, 536). I assured them that, even though it might seem that their lives were in the dead of winter, a wonderful springtime was certain to arrive as long as they remained steadfast in their Buddhist practice.

By sharing passages that spoke to the members' individual situations and circumstances, I tried to convey to them the importance of putting Buddhist study into practice. Their passionate seeking spirit in faith and our engaged study of the Daishonin's teachings based on the shared commitment of mentor and disciple opened the way to victory.

We also held study examinations that year. Their aim was not to check knowledge, but to enable each person to become happy and victorious in life and help them develop into outstanding champions of kosen-rufu.

Referring to the Chinese characters that comprise the text of the Lotus Sutra, the Daishonin writes:

"To the eyes of ordinary people, they look like characters. Persons of the two vehicles [i.e., voice-hearers and cause-awakened ones] perceive them as the void. Bodhisattvas look on them as innumerable doctrines. Buddhas recognize each character as a golden Shakyamuni. This is what is meant by the passage that says, '[If one can uphold this sutra], one will be upholding the Buddha's body' [LSOC11, 220]." (WND-1, 486)

Similarly, the words of a passage in the Daishonin's writings can take on a different depth of meaning depending on our life state or mind-set.

Those who engage in Buddhist study with the firm resolve to always base their efforts in any endeavor on the Daishonin's writings can bring forth limitless power.

From an essay series "Our Brilliant Path to Victory," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, September 10, 2011.

Section 19.3: A Shared Tradition of Studying the Writings of Nichiren Daishonin

In a discussion with youth division representatives, President Ikeda shares memories of studying the Daishonin's writings with President Toda and talks about the importance of Buddhist study and the attitude with which to approach it.

President Toda often used to say that when studying the Daishonin's writings, rather than focusing on the meaning of the words, we should strive to connect with the Daishonin's towering conviction, his solemn, fervent commitment to kosen-rufu, and his boundless compassion in seeking to lead all people to enlightenment.

It's fine to just read the Daishonin's writings a little bit at a time. It doesn't matter if you can't understand everything at first. What matters is to keep trying to read the Daishonin's writings and steadily engraving them in your life. Over time, as you repeat that process, you will create a solid core of philosophy in your life. Those who possess such an inner core will not be shaken by life's never-ending changes.

The ultimate aim of our Buddhist study is to become happy. We practice Nichiren Buddhism not only for our own happiness but to help others become happy, too.

[On hearing that youth division members had studied hard for a recently held study exam]

To be studying the great principles of Nichiren Buddhism is truly admirable. Those who read the Daishonin's writings every day, even just a little at a time, are able to tap fresh inspiration that will keep their faith healthy and sound.

The Daishonin's writings are incredibly profound. Each reading brings new discoveries and rouses fresh determinations.

I studied earnestly under the tutelage of Mr. Toda. He trained me thoroughly.

I will never forget the time back in November 1950, when Mr. Toda resigned as general director of the Soka Gakkai to prevent his business troubles from affecting the organization. Many people distanced themselves from him and, in a complete about-face, began criticizing and attacking him. He remained unperturbed, however, and looked calmly toward the future. It was around that time that he began giving lectures for me every morning on the Daishonin's writings and on a wide variety of other subjects.

Our one-to-one study sessions started just after 8:00 a.m. and lasted about an hour. Mr. Toda was incredibly demanding. He gave his all, and I did my best to keep up. Apart from some unavoidable postponements along the way, Mr. Toda maintained this schedule of instruction for close to a decade, until just before his death. It was this strict yet compassionate training from my mentor that made me the person I am today. It is the foundation on which my life has been built.

The first of the Daishonin's works we studied was "On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land," and then we went on to study the rest of his five major writings, "The Opening of the Eyes," "On Repaying Debts of Gratitude," "The Selection of the Time," and "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind." Next, we turned to "The Entity of the Mystic Law," The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, "The Unanimous Declaration by the Buddhas of the Three Existences," and many other writings.

Mr. Toda's words always brimmed with great conviction in faith. He also explained the essence of the Daishonin's teachings in simple, accessible language.

While we were studying "On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land," he said humorously: "The Mystic Law is like a magic wand! It will produce whatever we pray for, and enable us to become happy without fail."

Back in those days, being more familiar with Western philosophy from reading the works of writers like Montaigne and Bergson, I still found Buddhism somewhat hard to grasp. These words of Mr. Toda, however, changed that. I realized that, in the chaos and poverty of postwar Japan, everyone was searching for such a sure-fire philosophy. With this seemingly casual, lightly spoken remark, Mr. Toda impressed upon me that Buddhism is not abstract theory, but a practical philosophy for living in the real world.

I recall another occasion, about a month after Mr. Toda had resigned as general director. I was accompanying him to Ito [in Shizuoka Prefecture] on the Shonan train line. On the way, he gave me a private lecture on "The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind," and as we gazed out at the ocean from the window, he said: "Unless you read the Daishonin's writings with a life state of faith as vast and expansive as the Pacific, you won't be able to truly grasp his spirit and intent. It would be making a grave error to try to understand his writings with intellect alone."

At a time of great personal adversity, Mr. Toda studied the Daishonin's writings deeply.

Our Buddhist study mustn't simply be an intellectual pursuit. Engaging in Buddhist study based on faith leads to deepening our conviction and inspiring us to action. This is the way of genuine practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism.

The world and the times are constantly changing. Nothing ever stays the same. How can we perceive the true nature of things amid such ceaseless change?

The Daishonin writes: "When one knows the Lotus Sutra, one understands the meaning of all worldly affairs" (WND-1, 376). The teachings of Buddhism contain the wisdom for correctly perceiving all phenomena, providing a solid understanding of the world and of humanity, a correct understanding of society, and a universal understanding of the times.

Accordingly, people who view the world from the perspective of Buddhism are strong: nothing can shake them. This is also why studying the Daishonin's writings is so important.

"What defines a practitioner?"—President Makiguchi wrote these words firmly in the margin of his personal copy of the Daishonin's writings. On the same page, he had underlined in red a passage from "The Opening of the Eyes": "If there exists a votary [or practitioner] of the Lotus Sutra, then the three types of enemies are bound to exist as well" (WND-1, 278).

As practice progresses, devilish functions arise. They invariably assail those who genuinely uphold the Buddha's teachings. Battling those devilish functions is what defines a votary, or practitioner, of the Lotus Sutra, and also a Buddha. Mr. Makiguchi grasped this core truth of Buddhism. For this reason, when devilish functions took root within the priesthood, he recognized them for what they were and fought resolutely against them.

Further, during his some 500 days of imprisonment for his beliefs, he declared serenely that everything was unfolding exactly in accord with the Daishonin's writings.

We study the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism in order to be able to discern the workings of the devilish functions. In that sense, Buddhist study is a "sword" with which we can battle negative functions.

While in prison, Mr. Makiguchi read the Daishonin's writings with his very life. In doing so, he provided the Soka Gakkai with a model for the eternal future.

He marked the words "Here I will make a great vow" (WND-1, 280) from "The Opening of the Eyes" with a double underline, and beside them inscribed in large characters the words, "Great Vow."

Because he died in prison, it might be thought that Mr. Makiguchi's life ended in tragedy, but today countless people around the world are unstinting in their praise for his life and his commitment to that "great vow."

Let us continue to forge ahead boldly on our path of eternal honor based on the Daishonin's writings and carrying on the Daishonin's spirit, just like Mr. Makiguchi did.

From a dialogue series "Conversations with Youth," published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, 1994.

Section 19.4: "Exert Yourself in the Two Ways of Practice and Study"

President Ikeda discusses the proud Soka Gakkai tradition of striving in the "two ways of practice and study" as taught by Nichiren Daishonin.

The copy of the Gosho, the writings of Nichiren Daishonin, that first Soka Gakkai president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi always carried with him survives to this day, and I value it as one of the Soka Gakkai's greatest treasures.

Mr. Makiguchi heavily underlined the following passage, drawing a double circle in the margin next to it:

"Exert yourself in the two ways of practice and study. Without practice and study, there can be no Buddhism. You must not only persevere yourself; you must also teach others." (WND-1, 386)

In complete accord with these words from "The True Aspect of All Phenomena," Mr. Makiguchi persevered in the two ways of practice and study to the very end. Bravely facing the onslaughts of the three obstacles and four devils, he continued to put the Daishonin's writings into practice in his life, even after being imprisoned for his beliefs. His behavior was in stark contrast with that of the cowardly Nichiren Shoshu priests, who deleted passages from the Daishonin's writings out of fear of persecution by the militarist authorities.

Note on terminology: The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are (1) the obstacle of earthly desires, (2) the obstacle of karma, and (3) the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are (1) the hindrance of the five components, (2) the hindrance of earthly desires, (3) the hindrance of death, and (4) the hindrance of the devil king.

Even under harsh interrogation, Mr. Makiguchi dauntlessly continued to proclaim the lofty spirit of "establishing the correct teaching for the peace of the land." Beyond that, he also engaged his prison guards in sincere discussions about Buddhism. And right up until his death in prison, he continued to explore the philosophies and ideas of the world's leading thinkers through the lens of Buddhism.

Our commitment to the two ways of practice and study was thus established by the founder of the Soka Gakkai, an organization now advancing steadily forward as a new light of hope for the world. In this diligent pursuit of practice and study, we find the true essence of Buddhist action and the noblest way a person can live.

In "The True Aspect of All Phenomena," the Daishonin goes on to state: "Both practice and study arise from faith" (WND-1, 386). When faith deepens, practice and study progress, and when practice and study progress, faith deepens. Through this chain of cause and effect, our lives become filled with benefit that can vanquish the negative and bring forth the positive; we are assured of true happiness and able to accumulate everlasting good fortune.

Neglecting the two ways of practice and study is like flying an airplane with no idea of your direction, altitude, or destination, and no means of refueling. You will inevitably stray off course and lose speed. Faced with even the slightest turbulence, you will come crashing down. Those who persevere in the two ways of practice and study, however, walk the supreme path of victors in life; they are people who will never regress in faith and therefore always triumph.

Such things as popularity and celebrity are no more than empty illusions, but action is the hallmark of a person of true substance.

Over the years, our women's division members, in particular, have braved criticism and abuse while persevering with courage and tenacity to share the Mystic Law—the ultimate means for attaining happiness—with one individual after another. Where in this world can we find anything more heroic and noble?

One such women's division member in the early days of our movement, who had been unable to attend school under the bitter conditions of World War II, later introduced a university professor to the practice of Nichiren Buddhism. When Mr. Toda learned of her achievement, he smiled broadly and heaped praise and congratulations on her. It is a scene that I and many of my fellow pioneering members will never forget.

All of the self-serving individuals who abandoned their faith and then turned on the Soka Gakkai have one thing in common: they failed to make persistent, serious efforts in the two ways of practice and study. They were complacent, arrogant, and conceited.

If you cease to exert yourself in practice and study, your life will stop moving toward absolute happiness. Such stagnation almost always gives rise to arrogance, laziness, and resentment toward others. Mr. Toda sternly warned that leaders who are lax in practice and study only confuse and sow doubt in the members' hearts.

The lectures I attended at what I fondly refer to as "Toda University" included not only a diverse array of academic subjects but also sessions dedicated to the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism. For instance, Mr. Toda delivered profound and insightful lectures on the Daishonin's writing "The Entity of the Mystic Law."

Studying with Mr. Toda was as rigorous as the training of a master swordsman. Once, when he had finished a series of lectures, he presented participants with a certificate of completion. It was a simple document, on a single sheet of paper, and some people made fun of it. But I regarded it as an honor of the highest distinction, and accepted it with an inner pledge to repay the profound debt of gratitude I owed him.

I am confident that the almost 200 honorary degrees and titles I have now received from institutions around the world are the result of my vow at that time. This is actual proof derived from following the path of mentor and disciple, steadfastly upholding the "Law of the Lotus," which "explains the subtleties of cause and effect" (cf. WND-1, 421).

The British historian Arnold J. Toynbee, whom I deeply admire, made it a practice to set himself to work every morning, even if he sometimes didn't feel like it, and to accomplish something of value every single day. He strictly observed this personal regimen all his life.

Read the writings of Nichiren Daishonin every day, even if only a single sentence; talk to others about Buddhism every day, even if only a single word or phrase. When you exert yourself in your Buddhist practice by speaking out and taking action, a fresh and vibrant surge of life force will begin to flow within you in tune with the rhythm of the universe.

I have persevered in the two ways of practice and study with unwavering determination to spread the Buddhism of Nichiren Daishonin, our eternal mentor, and to fulfill the vow I made to President Toda, my mentor in life. That determination remains completely unchanged today, because I know that the bright path of mentor and disciple does not exist apart from the two ways of practice and study.

From an editorial titled "The Two Ways of Practice and Study," published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, September 2006.

Section 19.5: Engaging in Buddhist Study Is Itself a Victory

The Soka Gakkai held intermediate study exams throughout Japan in September 2002, and President Ikeda visited an examination site to warmly encourage participants before the start of the exam.

Thank you all for coming here today, on the weekend, to take this study exam.

Nichiren Buddhism is humanity's supreme philosophy, revealing the fundamental source of all things in the universe. It is a universal and enduring philosophy beyond compare.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Exert yourself in the two ways of practice and study. Without practice and study, there can be no Buddhism. You must not only persevere yourself; you must also teach others. Both practice and study arise from faith" (WND-1, 386). Without the two ways of practice and study, Buddhism would cease to exist, and no one could attain Buddhahood.

I'm sure some of you have traveled long distances today, and some of you may be quite tired. Yet in spite of that, you've gathered here out of your determination to study Buddhism. All of your efforts will bring you benefit and are the way to accumulate immense good fortune. In lifetime after lifetime, you will be people who are admired as great philosophers who surpass even the most learned scholars.

The important thing is to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Don't worry about whether or not you're able to answer all the exam questions: simply try your hardest and know that the efforts you have made to challenge yourself for the sake of kosen-rufu will become a source of eternal good fortune and remain as cherished memories in your lives.

The Daishonin, more than anyone, is surely praising you most highly for exerting yourselves in the two ways of practice and study.

The Daishonin alone awakened to the ultimate Law of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. None of the powerful or famous were aware of the correct teaching of Buddhism.

The Buddhist Law is the eternal principle that pervades the universe and all life. It is the key for building a happy life. Neither happiness nor peace will ever be attainable if we disparage or turn our backs on the correct teaching of Buddhism.

On the vast stage of human history, you are all noble pioneers in the great undertaking of spreading Nichiren Buddhism. Please take the exam with strong confidence in yourselves. The fact that you have gathered for this occasion to study Buddhism is itself a victory and an achievement. It will become a powerful driving force for your faith all your life. Thank you for your dedicated efforts!

Words of encouragement to intermediate study exam participants, Tokyo, September 29, 2002.

Section 19.6: A People-Centered Study Movement

In President Ikeda's novel The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) talks about the importance of upcoming study examinations at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting held in February 1961, and on the day of the examination, he shows his profound concern and care for the participants.

Speaking about the Study Department examination scheduled for early March, Shin'ichi remarked: "With the exam not far off, I'm sure your brains are all very busy trying to remember countless details!

"What I'd like to stress today is that those who pass the exams should not be smug about it, and those who do not pass should not be hard on themselves.

"Soka Gakkai study exams are held as a way to spur ourselves on and mark our progress in our lifelong study of Nichiren Daishonin's great philosophy of life. So, even if you should pass the exam but let it go to your head and lord it over others, you will have failed in the realm of faith. On the other hand, if you do not pass, that can become an incentive for you to make greater efforts to study Buddhism and thereby come to excel as a person of faith, something far more important than simply passing the exam.

"In addition, I hope you will engrave the writings of Nichiren Daishonin deeply in your hearts and develop strong, solid faith so that you will remain undaunted by any obstacle that might assail you."

Study exams were held on Sunday, March 5, at more than 180 sites in 125 cities nationwide. At 9:00 a.m., exams were held for Study Department assistant instructors who wished to advance to the next level of instructor, and instructors who wished to become assistant professors. Then at 2:00 p.m., the entrance exam was held for those seeking to become members of the Study Department for the first time.

That day, more than 110,000 people took these exams around the country. This was roughly 3.3 times the number who had taken the previous series of exams in 1959, less than two years earlier, a further demonstration of the phenomenal growth the Soka Gakkai had achieved since Shin'ichi became its president.

Those taking the exams ranged from homemakers to company presidents, from students to educators. They were of all ages, from teenagers to seniors. Making use of the little spare time they had with their work commitments or school studies, not to mention Soka Gakkai activities, all of them had earnestly studied the Daishonin's writings, striving to deepen their understanding of the profound teachings and philosophy of Nichiren Buddhism. There were even stories from around the country of individuals learning to read and write as a result of the efforts they made for the exam.

The creation of a new era and new society begins when people have a solid philosophy of life and a clear awareness of their personal mission. The Soka Gakkai's study program represented an unprecedented philosophical and educational movement centered on ordinary people.

That evening after the study exams, Shin'ichi spoke with Study Department leader Chuhei Yamadaira at the Soka Gakkai Headquarters and inquired about the progress in grading test papers from around the country.

When Yamadaira affirmed that everything was going smoothly, Shin'ichi said in a low voice, as if to himself: "Those who took the exams worked very hard. I'd like to give them all a passing grade."

"We can't do that!" exclaimed Yamadaira.

Shin'ichi couldn't help grinning at the Study Department leader's emphatic response. He said: "I know that, of course. It's an exam, after all; I was only voicing my personal sentiment.

"But just think how difficult it is for, say, a women's division member who is busy as a mother and a homemaker. Simply doing Soka Gakkai activities is challenging enough, not to mention finding time to study the Daishonin's writings. With crying children, looking after the house as well as cooking, it's almost impossible for her to find time to study quietly even if she wants to. It's like trying to read the Gosho in the middle of a battlefield!

"Granted, such challenges may be part of our Buddhist practice, but I don't want such members to be discouraged and disheartened because of their exam results. Those who pass will be fine. My thoughts are constantly with those who don't pass and what we can do to encourage them."

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 4, "Spring Storm" chapter.

Section 19.7: Basing Our Lives on the Writings of Nichiren Daishonin

President Ikeda describes how the Soka Gakkai has prevailed over adversity by remaining firmly based on Nichiren Daishonin's writings.

A vibrant seeking spirit to strive energetically in the two ways of practice and study has spread across the globe. People everywhere are studying and putting into action the great humanistic teachings of Nichiren Buddhism. The Daishonin's vision is being realized by the Soka Gakkai, the organization faithfully carrying out the Buddha's intent.

The Soka Gakkai will forever base itself on the Gosho, the writings of Nichiren Daishonin. They are writings of hope, proclaiming to humanity that "Winter always turns to spring" (WND-1, 536). They are writings imbued with respect for the dignity of life, affirming that "Life is the foremost of all treasures" (WND-1, 1125). They are writings of peace, opening the way for actualizing the ideal of "establishing the correct teaching for the peace of the land" (cf. WND-1, 6).

And they are writings of victory, demonstrating the triumph of reason over authority and of right over wrong. Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Buddhism is reason. Reason will win over your lord" (WND-1, 839); and "Though evils may be numerous, they cannot prevail over a single great truth" (WND-1, 618).

Nichiren Daishonin's writings are a brilliant source of hope; studying them fills us with courage and wisdom. This is because doing so brings his indomitable spirit to life within us, igniting the bright flame of faith for overcoming obstacles.

My wife, Kaneko, has an indelible memory from her childhood of President Makiguchi attending a discussion meeting at her home and quoting from the writings of Nichiren Daishonin with absolute conviction—even as agents of the Special Higher Police, the so-called thought police who were monitoring the meeting, looked on. She also received direct training from President Toda who set forth the guideline "Young women, make study your foundation!" That is why she has always continued to read the Gosho in earnest, whatever the situation.

Even after becoming a women's division member, she used any spare moment she could find to read even a few lines of the Daishonin's writings. In the midst of the turmoil surrounding the Freedom of Speech Incident, a newspaper reporter came to our home to interview me. He happened to see my wife quietly reading the Gosho, and later said how surprised he was that she should be engaged in Buddhist study even at such a difficult time.

Note on terminology: The Freedom of Speech Incident is the name given to a controversy that arose in 1970, when the Soka Gakkai defended itself against libelous claims. For further details, see the "Fierce Winds" chapter of The New Human Revolution, vol. 14.

That's how my wife has remained undefeated. It's why the women's division has stayed unshaken. Even in times of the greatest hardship, they have always remained calm and composed and continued to encourage members with a smile. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and studying the Daishonin's writings are the sources of their victory.

Mr. Toda spoke of the way to approach reading the Gosho, saying: "As you read each line, you should try to absorb it deeply, so that you can say 'How true! It's just as the Gosho states!'"

It's important to read the Daishonin's writings each day, even if only a few lines, and try to put them into practice. Please study earnestly, practice diligently, and create a brilliant example of winning in life based on Buddhism.

From a speech at a divisional representatives conference, Tokyo, December 26, 2008.

Section 19.8: Make Study Your Foundation!

Discussing the second of the five eternal guidelines he presented to the young women's division—"Study the world's foremost life philosophy"—President Ikeda stresses the importance of studying the teachings of Nichiren Daishonin in one's youth.

Nichiren Daishonin clearly states: "If the Law [teaching] that one embraces is supreme, then the person who embraces it must accordingly be foremost among all others" (WND-1, 61). What makes a person truly great? Not wealth, fame, or physical beauty. There are many cases where people enjoy fame for a time, but end up leading unhappy lives. True greatness is determined by the teachings we embrace, the philosophy we study, and the extent to which we put these into practice in our daily lives.

All of you who uphold the world's foremost life philosophy of Nichiren Buddhism are leading the most triumphant, meaningful lives, spending your youth in the most noble and fulfilling of ways.

Perhaps it is natural for people to be drawn to bright lights and glamour. It is often thought that fame makes a person somehow special, and those with high social status are often regarded as great. But that is an illusion.

Each of you is the most precious treasure of all. Happiness does not exist outside of you. There is nothing more wonderful than you. This is what Buddhism teaches. It enables you to bring your most precious treasure—you yourself—to shine. That is what makes it a genuine philosophy.

People tend to compare themselves to others. Of course, it is important to try to learn from others' good traits. But it's petty to envy what appears to be their happiness and good fortune. Nothing comes of that. Those who focus on polishing themselves and living with a sense of purpose are the winners in life. Please bear this point deeply in mind.

Through its teaching of the enlightenment of women, the Lotus Sutra embodies a life philosophy that can transform human history, opening the way for the equality, dignity, and happiness of all humanity. The Daishonin writes: "The enlightenment of women is expounded as a model [for the enlightenment of all living beings]" (WND-1, 930), and "Among the teachings of the Lotus Sutra, that of women attaining Buddhahood is first" (WND-1, 930).

The earnest prayers and unflagging efforts of your noble predecessors have ushered in an age of women. The stage for your activities now extends throughout the world.

In the Daishonin's treatise "The True Aspect of All Phenomena," we find the important passage:

"Exert yourself in the two ways of practice and study. Without practice and study, there can be no Buddhism. You must not only persevere yourself; you must also teach others. Both practice and study arise from faith. Teach others to the best of your ability, even if it is only a single sentence or phrase." (WND-1, 386)

I hope you will all experience for yourselves, and demonstrate to others, just how sublime is a youth spent exerting oneself in the two ways of practice and study.

The Daishonin also writes:

"Others read the Lotus Sutra with their mouths alone, in word alone, but they do not read it with their hearts. And even if they read it with their hearts, they do not read it with their actions. It is reading the sutra with both one's body and mind [as you have by encountering this hardship] that is truly praiseworthy!" (WND-1, 204)

Encountering life-threatening persecution as a result of speaking out to proclaim and defend the correct teaching in exact accord with the Daishonin's spirit, and battling dauntlessly against all manner of obstacles—this is the proud history of our Soka movement based on the mentor-disciple relationship. I hope that you, our young women's division members, will continue along this honorable path.

"Young women, make study your foundation!"—this is an eternal guideline set forth by President Toda. Nichiren Buddhism is the ultimate philosophy of happiness and peace. Through its wisdom, we can transform our lives on a fundamental level, bring people together, and change the destiny of the world.

Mr. Toda observed: "No matter how much humanity may come to understand the physical world, it won't lead to inner happiness." He also said: "The Daishonin sought to find a way to enable all people to attain happiness. When we earnestly study and put into practice the life philosophy of Nichiren Buddhism, it will shine as the ultimate teaching for becoming absolutely happy."

Speaking of the importance of philosophy, Mr. Toda declared:

"Why do we need philosophy? Why do our lives need the Daishonin's Buddhism? If it were enough to just do as we pleased, there'd be no need to go to school and study or have religious faith. But if we follow that course, we'll only come to regret it later. On the other hand, by studying philosophy, by studying Buddhism, we gain access to the most profound depths of life. What incredible joy there is to be found in seeking and attaining—with an open heart and deep emotion and inspiration—true and lasting happiness! What an immeasurable delight it is to know the deeply wondrous nature of life and experience our own beings brimming with limitless joy!"

He further stated:

"With the Gohonzon as our foundation, we of the Soka Gakkai are advancing toward the lofty goal of kosen-rufu. And we are carrying out our practice based on studying the teachings of the world's greatest life philosophy, the quintessence of all Buddhist teachings."

The karmic ties we share as fellow members, working together for kosen-rufu with the Soka Gakkai, are profound indeed.

Mr. Toda also made the following remarks to the young women's division:

"Closely examining human existence, Nichiren Buddhism solidly brings together the four viewpoints of self, life, society, and the universe."

"Read the Daishonin's writings more intently. Everything you need is written there."

"If you make the Daishonin's writings your foundation, you will never be swayed by any problem."

"If you base yourself on the supreme value of the Mystic Law, you'll always know how to proceed."

If we look at things from the perspective of faith, the way forward will become clear to us. Do not be deceived by pretense or hypocrisy. The time of youth is one when we are easily swayed by our emotions and environment. Establishing an unshakable foundation of Buddhist study in your lives while you are still young, therefore, is profoundly meaningful.

From a speech at a young women's division commemorative gathering, Tokyo, June 4, 2009.

Section 19.9: Study of Nichiren Buddhism Is the Driving Force for Human Revolution

President Ikeda discusses the importance of reading the writings of Nichiren Daishonin and applying them to one's life, and explains why President Toda placed such importance on Buddhist study when he was rebuilding the Soka Gakkai after World War II.

In October 1271, shortly after the life-threatening Tatsunokuchi Persecution and just before departing for his exile on Sado Island, Nichiren Daishonin sent a heartfelt letter to his disciples in which he wrote: "One may be letter-perfect in reciting the Lotus Sutra, but it is far more difficult to act as it teaches" (WND-1, 200).

Note on terminology: The Tatsunokuchi Persecution and Sado Exile refers to events beginning on September 12, 1271, when the authorities arrested Nichiren Daishonin and took him to a place called Tatsunokuchi on the outskirts of Kamakura, where they tried to summarily execute him under cover of darkness. When the execution attempt failed, he was held in detention at the residence of the deputy constable of Sado, Homma Rokuro Saemon, in Echi (part of present-day Kanagawa Prefecture). After a period of about a month while the government debated what to do with him, he was exiled to Sado Island, which was tantamount to a death sentence. However, when his predictions of internal strife and foreign invasion were fulfilled, the government issued a pardon in March 1274, and he returned to Kamakura.

He then went on to declare that, in encountering great persecution by practicing exactly as the Buddha taught, he alone had "read and lived" the passages of the Lotus Sutra predicting that its practitioners of future ages would be "despised, hated, envied, and resented" (cf. LSOC3, 110), and that "hatred and jealousy toward the sutra will abound even more after the Buddha's passing" (cf. LSOC10, 203; cf. WND-1, 200).

No doubt the words of this indomitable lion king shook his beloved disciples to the core. He was asking: "How will you, my disciples, fight when you meet such trials or obstacles?"

The writings of Nichiren Daishonin are timeless scriptures. They are a stirring cry from his very being. They are an impassioned declaration of truth and justice, which he left for us who practice the Lotus Sutra in the Latter Day, an evil age rife with devilish functions. They are a mighty lion's roar calling out to us powerfully: "Strive with courage and never abandon your faith!" "Adorn your lives with triumph!" "Resolutely defeat evil!"

That is why all of us, as the Daishonin's disciples, must seriously ask ourselves whenever we read his writings: "How will I live my life? How will I challenge myself for kosen-rufu?"

To read the Daishonin's writings with one's life means to read them not as something that concerns others or as an account of something that happened long ago, but as something that directly relates to us and the present, and to apply it to the challenges we face in our own lives. This is the correct path for manifesting the solemn spirit of oneness of mentor and disciple.

It is important that we deeply impress the Daishonin's words in our hearts—even if it is just a single line or passage that strikes an inner chord or feels as if it were written especially for us—and that we constantly make fresh efforts for the sake of kosen-rufu with unwavering faith. This is how we can observe the injunction of Nikko Shonin, the Daishonin's direct successor, which calls on us to "engrave the Daishonin's writings in our lives" (GZ, 1618).

Note on terminology: This is from Article 11 of "The Twenty-Six Admonitions of Nikko." Nichiren Daishonin's designated successor, Nikko Shonin, wrote the "Twenty-Six Admonitions" in 1333 for the sake of practitioners of future generations to maintain the purity of the Daishonin's teachings. It outlines the fundamental spirit of faith, practice, and study.

During World War II, Mr. Toda spent two dark years in prison as a result of persecution by the Japanese militarist government. It was while behind bars that he awakened to kosen-rufu as the ultimate mission of his life. As the disciple of first president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, who tragically died in prison, he vowed not to be defeated by the repressive forces of authority who were to blame for his mentor's death. He was fearless; not even the prospect of execution by firing squad could deter him. Immediately upon his release from prison, he launched his great struggle for kosen-rufu.

This same persecution, however, had caused the rest of Mr. Makiguchi's disciples to abandon their faith. In "The Opening of the Eyes," the Daishonin writes: "Foolish men are likely to forget the promises they have made when the crucial moment comes" (WND-1, 283). At the crucial moment, these disciples trembled and cowered and discarded the precious sword that was their faith in the Mystic Law. Mr. Toda lamented and grieved at this turn of events. Why would mere imprisonment cause them to abandon their faith? Wasn't it the most brilliant opportunity to acquire great and everlasting benefit? After all, there is nothing timid or fainthearted about the faith that the Daishonin describes in his writings.

President Toda reflected. He contemplated the matter seriously. Day and night, this man of extraordinary intellect thought deeply, constantly asking himself why the others had given up faith.

He came to the conclusion that they lacked a foundation in Buddhist study, which clarifies what faith is all about and serves as the driving force for one's practice. He realized that he had forgotten to teach them to read the Daishonin's writings. If he enabled members to imbue their lives with Buddhist study—that is, with the teachings contained in the Daishonin's writings—they would not quit practicing. Even the timid would be inspired to persevere in their struggles with courage. The Daishonin's writings—that is the key, he realized.

Based on Mr. Toda's guidance to this effect, which sprang from the painful lessons of his wartime experience, the Soka Gakkai as a whole—leaders and members alike—carried the Daishonin's writings with them everywhere and studied them thoroughly.

There is no Buddhism without study. And Buddhism without faith is not Buddhism.

Whenever we had a spare moment [in those early days of our movement], we studied the Daishonin's writings. At every meeting, we read them, discussed them, and studied them together. A bright new flame burned within us. Our eyes sparkled with the vision of a vast new future. Reading the Daishonin's writings contributed directly to our human revolution; it was the impetus for limitlessly deepening our faith.

The Buddhist study I am referring to is not the study of abstract concepts. It is not about memorizing difficult doctrines or becoming a scholar or academic.

The study of the Daishonin's Buddhism that we undertook at that time served as a source of strength to persevere in our lives, in our daily struggles, and in our efforts for kosen-rufu. It was a process of acquiring an understanding of the teachings and principles of Nichiren Buddhism, a great philosophy that we could actually make part of our lives in order to take on life's challenges and win in society.

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, October 20, 2004.

Section 19.10: The Power of Engraving the Daishonin's Words in Our Hearts

The following is a scene from The New Human Revolution, where the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) shares with a youth some words of Nichiren Daishonin that he has taken deeply to heart.

"There is one passage of The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings," Shin'ichi said, "that I have always taken deeply to heart since my days supporting and assisting Mr. Toda: 'If in a single moment of life we exhaust the pains and trials of millions of kalpas, then instant after instant there will arise in us the three Buddha bodies with which we are eternally endowed. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is just such a "diligent" practice' (OTT, 214)."

Note on terminology: The three bodies of the Buddha refer to the Dharma body, the reward body, and the manifested body. The Dharma body is the fundamental truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the compassionate actions the Buddha carries out to lead people to happiness.

This passage teaches the essence of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. "The three Buddha bodies with which we are eternally endowed" refers to the boundless life state of Buddhahood within us. The key to manifesting this life state in each instant is to expend millions of kalpas' worth of strenuous effort in a single moment of life. "Millions of kalpas" means an infinite expanse of time. Through practicing Nichiren Daishonin's Buddhism with this kind of concentrated effort, we can bring forth our inherent Buddha wisdom and life force.

Shin'ichi continued: "The Daishonin teaches that only through intense struggle, undaunted by hardships, can we attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, carry out our human revolution, and transform our life condition. In a sense, my days have been a continuous, arduous, all-out struggle. I have been through inconceivably bitter experiences time and again.

"On those occasions, this passage sustained me, helping me renew my resolve, chant daimoku, overcome all hardships, and emerge triumphant.

"It is important that you courageously exert yourself, too, for the sake of kosen-rufu, the happiness of others, and your own future."

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 26, "Atsuta" chapter.

Supplementary Reading

The writings of Nichiren Daishonin have been translated into more than 10 languages, making them available to people around the world. In his preface to the Spanish edition, published in 2008, President Ikeda emphasizes the importance of interfaith dialogue and clarifies the significance of deepening our understanding of the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism today.

The essential purpose of all religions is to impart hope and give meaning to our lives. All religions basically aim to provide inner serenity and contribute to happiness and peace. In that sense, they share the fundamental goal of benefitting people.

I firmly believe that a profound recognition of this common ground is the requirement of religion in this age of globalization. It also serves as the foundation for interfaith dialogue, one of the pressing challenges facing human civilization.

Of course, each religion is unique and different. For example, each offers different views on what constitutes genuine inner serenity—ranging from experiencing the love of God to a feeling of reliance on an unseen higher power, following the dictates of one's conscience, possessing a state of inner peace or the ability to control one's desires, and numerous other variants. The differences among religions have arisen from a host of complex causes, including innate human diversity, factors linked to particular places and times, and historical background.

But all of these differing religious teachings contain, in some form, insights and truths for enabling human beings to attain happiness. By learning from those respective insights and truths, while recognizing their mutual differences, all religions can improve their capacity for fulfilling their essential role in guiding people to happiness.

It is my sincere hope that all the religions of the world will continue to follow this path of dialogue and mutual self-improvement and, while demonstrating their unique value, join together as religions dedicated to the welfare of humanity and become a major force for world peace.

The 20th century has been described as the first century in which the religions of the world started to acknowledge and communicate with one another. It is certainly true that the tragedies wrought by the two world wars provoked deep reflection, reawakening the awareness of the happiness and peace of humanity as the great purpose of religion, and creating a new current of mutual recognition among religions based upon that perspective. It is the mission of religion in the 21st century to amplify that current into a real and meaningful groundswell.

The Soka Gakkai was founded between the two world wars of the 20th century. Religious groups in Japan at that time had for the most part been subsumed within the Japanese state apparatus, employed to support and promote the state's policies and interests. As a result, they lacked either the moral courage or power to prevent the militarization of Japanese society and its slide toward war.

It was against such a backdrop that the Soka Gakkai rediscovered the potential of Nichiren Buddhism, and the Lotus Sutra upon which it is based, as a body of teachings for the happiness of all humanity, and began to put those teachings into practice. Because of this, the Soka Gakkai was subjected to harsh persecution by the Japanese militarist authorities of the day, and its founder, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, died in prison refusing to compromise his beliefs.

According to the Lotus Sutra—which is the essence of Mahayana Buddhism—the wish of the Mahayana bodhisattvas to realize happiness for both self and others is the fundamental wish of all human beings, and, indeed, of all living beings. Awakening people to this fundamental wish and enabling them to bring forth their positive potential is, I believe, the essential mission not only of Buddhism, but of all religions.

The Lotus Sutra describes the emergence into the world of a great multitude of such bodhisattvas who embrace this essential mission—the so-called Bodhisattvas of the Earth. It articulates the extremely important point that when awakened to this fundamental wish inherent in life, all people can become Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

The Lotus Sutra also teaches the shining example of Bodhisattva Never Disparaging, who greeted every person he met with the words, "I have profound reverence for you" (LSOC20, 308), and persisted in this practice of revering others even when insulted and physically attacked. He exemplifies the essence of the bodhisattva practice—believing in our own Buddha nature and the Buddha nature of others and profoundly respecting all people.

According to the Daishonin, Bodhisattva Never Disparaging's practice of demonstrating profound respect for people is the core practice of the Lotus Sutra and the heart of Buddhism itself. He clearly proclaims:

"The heart of the Buddha's lifetime of teachings is the Lotus Sutra, and the heart of the practice of the Lotus Sutra is found in the '[Bodhisattva] Never Disparaging' chapter. What does Bodhisattva Never Disparaging's profound respect for people signify? The purpose of the appearance in this world of Shakyamuni Buddha, the lord of teachings, lies in his behavior as a human being." (WND-1, 851-52)

Born in 13th-century Japan, the Daishonin keenly perceived that he was living in an age when people were steadily losing sight of the Buddha's great vow to lead all people to enlightenment—the expression of our highest potential. When this happens, people succumb to egoism. The three poisons of greed, anger, and foolishness pollute their hearts and muddy society, triggering an intensifying cycle of misery and evil, which will eventually become pervasive and permanent.

The Daishonin declared that in order to fulfill the great vow of the Buddha in such a perilous age, we must carry on the mission of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth and the practice of Bodhisattva Never Disparaging, and spread that mission and practice with deep confidence and conviction among people in society.

He went on to develop an extensive and detailed body of teachings for that purpose, and himself took the lead in putting them into practice. At the heart of the treatises and letters contained in this newly translated Spanish volume is the Daishonin's clarification of the mission and practice of bodhisattvas—that is, to work for the happiness of oneself and others—and also his instructions regarding how to encourage others to embrace this mission as well.

The Japanese text from which this Spanish edition is translated is the Soka Gakkai edition of the Nichiren Daishonin gosho zenshu (Collected Writings of Nichiren Daishonin). It was published in April 1952, about a year after my mentor Josei Toda was inaugurated as the second Soka Gakkai president.

In a sense, the full-scale development of the Soka Gakkai that took place under President Toda's leadership after World War II can be said to have begun in tandem with the publication of Nichiren Daishonin's writings. In the decades since, members in Japan have made the Daishonin's writings their foundation in faith and life while striving wholeheartedly to realize the Daishonin's vision of kosen-rufu to bring peace and happiness to humanity. In the process, they have brilliantly embodied the bodhisattva ideal presented in the Lotus Sutra.

Here, I would like to briefly discuss the spirit SGI members should adopt when reading the Daishonin's writings as a means for deepening their faith.

Reading the Daishonin's writings means connecting with the lofty, noble spirit of the Daishonin himself, who gave his life to protecting and propagating the correct teaching of Buddhism in order to relieve people from suffering. We can see the brilliant light of this spirit throughout his writings.

For instance, whenever I read the following passage—"The sufferings that all living beings undergo, all springing from [the] one cause—all these are Nichiren's own sufferings" (WND-2, 934)—I am always struck and humbled by the breadth of the Daishonin's compassion contained in this pledge and his resolve never to stand by in the face of people's suffering.

Inspired by the Daishonin's spirit, SGI members have stood up to emulate it in their own lives, even if only in some small way. They have empathized with others' sufferings, shared the message of supreme hope that we all possess the Buddha nature, offered warm support and encouragement, and helped people revitalize their lives. Through these efforts, they have created a growing network of hope across the globe based on the shining philosophy of Nichiren Buddhism.

Another example of the Daishonin's lofty spirit is found in the passage: "Even if it seems that, because I was born in the ruler's domain, I follow him in my actions, I will never follow him in my heart" (WND-1, 579). Whenever I read it, I am moved to the very depths of my being. It is, in contemporary terms, a powerful affirmation of freedom of the spirit, freedom of belief, and freedom of thought.

The fundamental force for achieving those freedoms is fearlessness in the face of evil perpetrated by those in power. The Daishonin describes this fearlessness as the "heart of a lion king" (WND-1, 302). We can truly claim to have embodied the aforementioned passage of the Daishonin when we succeed in summoning this lionhearted spirit to overcome all hardships and lead lives of integrity and conscience.

The aim of studying the Daishonin's writings is to connect with his spirit and deepen our faith. Studying the profound teachings of Buddhism strengthens our conviction in the enduring and immutable hope, peace, and happiness that exist within us all. At the same time, by learning from the way the Daishonin triumphed over every obstacle, we can summon the courage to rise to the challenges we ourselves face. This is the eternal formula for practice-oriented Buddhist study.

It is my sincere hope that SGI members around the world will apply themselves to reading and studying the Daishonin's writings with an ever-fresh seeking spirit and deepening faith.

From the preface to the Spanish edition of The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, published on May 3, 2008.
