Chapter 31: The Great Path to World Peace

Section 31.1: Pioneers in a Grand Experiment

"Buddhism is universal; it belongs to all people," President Ikeda says. "Promoting peace, culture, and education should not be seen as just a means for achieving kosen-rufu: it is the aim of kosen-rufu itself. Awakening people, fostering them, bringing them together, and creating peace and happiness in the world—that is the eternal mission of the Soka Gakkai."

President Ikeda has held high the banner of a new humanism, which sees the noble life state of Buddhahood in all people and makes the inner transformation of the individual its starting point. He has taken the lead in promoting a movement for peace, culture, and education based on Nichiren Buddhism around the world.

This final chapter of selected excerpts features President Ikeda's thoughts on Buddhist humanism, a guiding vision for the Soka Gakkai's movement.

In this first selection, he recalls his dialogue with historian Arnold J. Toynbee and discusses the profound mission of the Soka Gakkai to create a new current of human history based on the humanistic principles of Nichiren Buddhism.

The British historian Arnold J. Toynbee, with whom I held a dialogue in the early 1970s, said that with the decline of Christianity three new "religions" were born: faith in progress through science; nationalism; and communism.

But, he asserted, none of them had proven satisfactory: they had all failed, and they couldn't bring true happiness to humanity. He said he hoped that a new higher religion would emerge, providing humanity with the strength "to contend with, and to overcome, the evils that are serious present threats to human survival."

Such was the conclusion of one of the great scholars of our time.

The religion that Professor Toynbee looked to and held out hopes for was Mahayana Buddhism, which was why he had expressed an interest in meeting me. We met and shared ideas for a total of 10 days in 1972 and 1973, talking from morning until night. How fondly I remember those times!

Professor Toynbee had immense faith in what the Soka Gakkai was trying to achieve. Our dialogue, Choose Life, has now been published in 31 languages as of 2023, and has been widely read by influential thinkers around the world.

The 21st century is the time when people across the globe will test and prove the power of Nichiren Buddhism—the essence of Mahayana Buddhism. The aim of Nichiren Buddhism is human revolution—the inner transformation of each individual. And activities for peace, culture, and education, based on human revolution, are the greatest way to contribute to global society. I have followed this path opened by Presidents Makiguchi and Toda and have made practical, concrete efforts to promote it throughout the world. And all over the globe, you our dedicated members are the pioneers carrying out this grand experiment in the history of humankind.

Even if your efforts don't stand out or attract media attention, what you are doing is thousands of times more significant than the deeds of any celebrity or warmongering political leader. You are shaping the currents that will change the course of human history. I am certain that Presidents Makiguchi and Toda have only the highest praise for you and your efforts.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, July 3, 1999.

Section 31.2: Treasure Towers of Respect for the Dignity of Life

The enormous treasure tower described in "The Emergence of the Treasure Tower" chapter of the Lotus Sutra symbolizes the grand, universal scale and dignity of life. Now is the time, President Ikeda states, to establish an age of profound respect for life.

Life is a treasure tower. Its scale is as vast as the universe. Life is weightier than the earth; each individual is more important than the nation. This conviction is the foundation for our Soka humanism.

We are engaged in the work of building great treasure towers of respect for the dignity of life throughout society and the world. Through our movement, we are not only spreading the philosophy of respect for the dignity of life; we are helping one person after another reveal their precious inner treasure tower shining with nobility and happiness. There is no undertaking more sacred. Each Soka Gakkai member is an emissary of the Buddha carrying out the Buddha's work.

All around us, towers of base impulses have risen skyward—towers of authoritarianism that block the sun; gilded towers of economic supremacism; towers of military dominance that cast dark shadows of death. The 20th century was a time when those ominous towers rose their highest and proliferated most widely. But it was also a time when their fragility was most clearly revealed and their foundations, which had seemed so strong, began to crumble.

Our struggle is to replace those towers with towers of humanity, towers of happiness, towers of life. But because we are pioneering the way for humankind, we are bound to face difficulties.

The 20th century has been called a century of revolution and war. It was a century in which the myth that the nation-state is sacrosanct grew to epic proportions, wreaking enormous destruction and distress. The worship of the nation-state—the worship of collective force, and the myth of nationalism—reached its extremes in Stalinism on the left and fascism on the right. The cult of power culminated in the development of nuclear weapons; the mushroom cloud is the great tower of the devilish forces that destroy life.

And in this way, the 20th century, more than any other, became the century of "megadeath." The human race has experienced the full brunt of the idiocy and misery that belief in the sanctity of the state has caused. Nevertheless, in the second half of the century, the hope embodied in respect for human dignity began to take root.

It was in 1951, the midpoint of the century, that second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda made his declaration for kosen-rufu. In his inaugural speech on becoming president, he proclaimed: "I vow to achieve a membership of 750,000 households during my lifetime!" It was also the year the Soka Gakkai youth division was established. Its mission, therefore, was clear. The time had come to build treasure towers of respect for human dignity.

I believe that the coming age will be one of respect for the dignity of life, an age of life. I have stressed this for many years, asserting that it is the only hope for humanity's survival. It is gradually becoming clear to thinking people around the world that we cannot respect the dignity of human beings without respecting the dignity of life itself. It has become apparent that selfish anthropocentrism, unchecked greed, and a sense of entitlement can only lead to humanity's downfall.

The universal scale of the treasure tower in the Lotus Sutra teaches us that the human being is more important than the state. Our movement promoting peace, culture, and education based on Buddhism, our movement for kosen-rufu, is demonstrating the nobility of the human being—both philosophically and in actual practice.

From a speech at a youth division general meeting, Tokyo, July 14, 1991.

Section 31.3: Creating a World without War

In the following excerpt from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) highlights the negative tendency of humankind to hate and hurt one another, even though all people desire happiness and peace, and clearly explains the solution. The scene takes place in October 1962, at the height of the Cuban Missile Crisis, the confrontation between the United States and the Soviet Union that brought the world to the brink of nuclear war.

"I understand that members have been directing questions to you leaders about the situation in Cuba, asking: 'What is going to happen?' or 'Which side does the Soka Gakkai support, the United States or the Soviet Union?' This is only natural. The basis of our response to this grave issue is our powerful prayer that war cannot and must not be allowed to break out.

"Our world today is divided into the two opposing camps of East and West. But the Soka Gakkai leans neither toward the political right nor left, nor does it side with either the United States or the Soviet Union. We see humanity as one global human family. Our position is to lead all the world's people in the direction of peace.

"The present confrontation has only underscored our conviction that the great philosophy of Nichiren Buddhism is an absolute necessity for our age. The people of the United States, the Soviet Union, and Cuba all cherish a desire for peace. They all want to enjoy their lives. Ordinary people and thoughtful leaders the world over have begun to seriously ponder what can be done to eliminate war, how to solve the problem at its root, and what philosophy is needed to achieve that.

"Yet despite this desire for peace, nations succumb to mutual distrust and regard one another with hatred and hostility. This is the reality of our world. How, under such circumstances, can we eliminate all possibility of nuclear war? Our Buddhist philosophy holds the only true solution.

"Nichiren Buddhism teaches that all living beings are Buddhas. It reveals that all people possess the Buddha nature, that self and others are inherently endowed with the life state of Buddhahood. The life philosophy of Buddhism is a magnificent body of thought that affirms the dignity and preciousness of human life. When this teaching spreads around the world, it surely will act as the most powerful force for preventing war.

"In addition, anyone who exerts themselves in this Buddhist practice will cause the life state of Buddhahood to well up within them. With this, they can vanquish the evil impulses to destroy and slaughter that may exist within their lives. The disaster of nuclear war arises solely from fundamental ignorance, the most basic delusion inherent in life. Many negative and evil states of mind arise from that ignorance, including distrust, hate, jealousy, the desire to dominate others, and the impulse to kill.

Note on terminology: Fundamental ignorance is the most deeply rooted illusion inherent in life, said to give rise to all other illusions. It is the inability to see or recognize the truth, particularly, the true nature of one's life.

"Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has the power to sever this fundamental ignorance and allow the light of true wisdom—that is, fundamental enlightenment or the inherent Buddha nature—to illuminate our lives and thus transform hate into compassion, destruction into creation, and distrust into trust. We also call this human revolution.

"The preamble of the UNESCO Constitution opens with the famous declaration 'That since wars begin in the minds of men, it is in the minds of men that the defenses of peace must be constructed.' This is an extremely important observation. How, then, do we build defenses of peace that are truly lasting?

"Nichiren Buddhism makes such construction possible, and this is what the Soka Gakkai has been doing in actuality. By sharing this great life philosophy with others through one-to-one dialogue, haven't we been constructing strong and unassailable defenses of peace in the heart of one individual after another? The road to our goal of kosen-rufu may seem incredibly long, but it is the most direct path to building lasting world peace.

"By passing the great Buddhist message of compassion and peace from one friend to the next, let's absolutely ensure that nuclear war never happens. That is our mission."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 7, "The Flower of Culture" chapter.

Section 31.4: A New Humanism

In a lecture delivered in India, the birthplace of Buddhism, President Ikeda discusses the history and limitations of contemporary humanism and outlines the principles of a new humanism based on Buddhism.

In human society, it is the power of humanity, of humanism, that will exert the greatest, most profound force over the long term. What, however, is humanism, which has taken so many different forms?

The evolution of the idea of humanism can be analyzed from many different angles. Here, I would like first to note the tradition of individualistic humanism that developed in the West over the course of the Renaissance and the Protestant Reformation, becoming the foundational ethos of civil society in the modern era. In the latter half of the nineteenth century, the contradictions and limitations of this mode of humanism became more evident, giving rise to the experiment of socialist humanism.

While these different forms of humanism succeeded in liberating humanity from its medieval thralldom to an absolute being, humanity thus liberated found itself trapped by its own egotism, by what Buddhism calls the "lesser self." Humanity has fallen prey to the fickle dictates of desire. The ills that result take the form of the complex of problems now facing humanity: the unraveling of social and community ties, environmental degradation, the growing gap between rich and poor. The depth of the crisis gripping our post-ideological world is powerfully symbolized by the emergence of a wide range of fundamentalisms.

What, then, can provide the motivating energy and inspiration to move beyond the present impasse? How can we initiate the work of creating a vibrant global civilization of peace?

Here I would like to propose a new humanism—one that takes a cosmological perspective on what it means to be human—as a way of transcending the limitations of humanism to date and guiding us out of our current predicament. My reason for making this proposal is this: Ideology, which in one form or another has been at the heart of modern humanism, tends to emphasize dualism and conflict, producing discrimination and rejection of others. Cosmologies, in contrast, tend to include and embrace others; tolerance is inherent in cosmology.

The dharma-based humanism that supported Ashoka's reign is an excellent example of an embracing cosmology. It is succinctly expressed in the fundamental principles of his rule: non-killing and mutual respect.

While a discussion of the principle of non-killing should really include forms of life other than human beings, for the present instant I would like to assert the minimalist stance that humans should under no circumstance kill other humans. This, I believe, should be in the preambular paragraph of any charter that humanity might choose to adopt in the 21st century.

History has been stained by too much blood shed in the name of "justice." The French Revolution, for example, is a seminal event in the development of the modern tradition of humanism, and yet how many innocent people lost their lives to the justice of the guillotine? Likewise, in carrying out the grand experiment of socialist humanism, its original intent was betrayed as tens of millions of lives were sacrificed. This, again, is one of the immovable historical facts of the 20th century.

Such suffering must never be repeated. Thus, the first provision of a new humanism must be an absolute injunction against the taking of human life. In whatever logic or rationale it may be cloaked, "justice" accompanied by violence is empty and false. As Rabindranath Tagore declared throughout his life, any god who demands living sacrifice is a false god.

What, then, is the underlying weakness of the kinds of humanism that have prevailed until now?

While this is not the time or place to attempt a complete and rigorous analysis, I would like to state simply that the fundamental failure of humanism to date has been a failure to fully believe in people and to trust them.

Thus we understand the importance of Ashoka's second policy, of mutual respect. When mistrust of humanity is directed against oneself, one experiences disempowerment. When directed against others, it takes the form of the refusal of dialogue and, ultimately, violence. Mistrust breeds mistrust. Hatred breeds more hatred. How can this deadly cycle be broken? Here I believe we need to call forth what might be termed a holistic, or even cosmological, humanism, one that regards the life of the individual as extending out to and embracing the entire cosmos, and therefore meriting the most profound reverence.

In India this view has flowered in different forms over the millennia, from the sages of the Upanishads to the teachings of Gautama Buddha.

The Lotus Sutra, which stands at the pinnacle of the teachings of Gautama Buddha, represents the ultimate crystallization of this philosophy. This is because it teaches people to abandon their attachment to difference, and urges them to awaken to the "great earth of life" which supports us all. When we stand on that common ground, difference ceases to be the cause of conflict, but instead serves to enrich our experience of life.

From a lecture titled "A New Humanism for the Coming Century," at the Rajiv Gandhi Foundation, India, October 21, 1997.

Section 31.5: The Century of Life

In his numerous dialogues, President Ikeda has consistently spoken of a Buddhist humanism. Here, talking with American professor of theology Lawrence E. Sullivan, he discusses the mission of religion in the 21st century.

Human endeavors should be undertaken with the human being in mind and contribute to human happiness.

And if we are starting and ending with the human being, we find that thought, philosophy, and, ultimately, religion are what influence people on the most fundamental level, making us who we are.

Politics, economics, culture, and education—we can liken all these to the cherry and maple trees and the lilies and roses whose forms rise from the fertile earth to enrich people's hearts. The question, then, is whether the earth from which they grow has been properly cultivated. Is it healthy? Does it have a rich life force? If not, the beautiful flowering plants and trees will not take root and grow.

That earth is the people, the life of the people. A religion that gives direction to people's lives can also be likened to the earth. When the earth is healthy and sound, flowers bloom in rich profusion. The significance of the SGI movement lies in enabling the blossoming of human potential and the flourishing of peace, culture, and education based on Buddhism.

Only when we have as our foundation a religion that can answer the fundamental questions of human existence—What is life? What does it mean to be human? How should I live my life?—will we realize a brilliant flowering in our daily lives, as well as in culture, politics, and economics.

The motivation for scientific or economic progress must always be to benefit humanity, to enhance life.

Knowing ourselves and understanding others ultimately comes down to understanding what it means to be human, what is life itself, what is human dignity. And in our quest to understand the human condition, we cannot overlook what Buddhism calls the "four sufferings." These are the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death. Without confronting these fundamental sufferings, any effort to pursue happiness is as ephemeral as a castle built on sand or a rootless plant floating on the water.

Buddhism also describes another four kinds of suffering—the suffering of having to part from those one loves, the suffering of having to meet with those one hates, the suffering of being unable to obtain what one desires, and the suffering arising from the five components that constitute one's body and mind. These are grouped together with the four fundamental sufferings to make the "eight sufferings."

Note on terminology: The five components, also called five components of life, consist of form, perception, conception, volition, and consciousness. Buddhism holds that these constituent elements unite temporarily to form an individual living being. Together they also constitute one of the three realms of existence, the other two being the realm of living beings and the realm of the environment.

From time immemorial, humanity has sought to resolve these sufferings. Only a religion teaching the fundamental Law of life can respond to them. Now is the time to share the means for their resolution with all humankind.

To make the 21st century a century of hope for humanity, we need to return to the basics—to what it means to be a human being—and from there build a sound foundation for human happiness. This is how to address the questions of life and death and make the 21st century a century of life, something I have advocated for many years.

From a dialogue with Lawrence E. Sullivan, director of Harvard University's Center for the Study of World Religions, Tokyo, March 27, 1993.

Section 31.6: Placing the Focus on Human Beings

In an interview to mark the publication of the Bulgarian-language edition of his dialogue with Bulgarian art historian and Sofia University professor Axinia Djourova, President Ikeda stresses that the goal of the 21st century must be to realize peace and happiness for all humankind.

The 20th century was a century of war. War is nothing but slaughter and destruction. It inflicts misery, casting people into a living hell. It is the most barbaric of human activities. Yet, humankind in the 20th century repeated this on an unprecedented scale.

The second half of the century saw a step forward, becoming a period where the focus shifted to economic development. Whereas war results from the logic of power, economic activity is guided by the logic of profit and loss. While economic growth can lead some people to great prosperity, it can, at the same time, force others into poverty. Some who fail in business may even be driven to suicide. Economic growth has the potential to widen the gap between the rich and poor; it can undermine equality and freedom. These are aspects we must consider. But that doesn't mean we should abandon economic pursuits, as they remain indispensable human activities.

The important point to remember is that the original aim of politics and economics is people's happiness and welfare. For that reason, philosophy, politics, and economics should all be directed toward that essential, fundamental aim. Over time, however, these realms gradually became divorced from their true purpose and estranged from the human being.

I therefore believe we have entered an age in which humankind must once again shine a light on the human being. People must be the focus. Without seriously pondering this matter, we will find ourselves repeating the tragedies of the past.

The new century must be an age of humanism. How should we, as human beings, live our lives? How do we become truly happy? How can we live in peace? All of us—including scholars, educators, and leaders in every field—need to make this our prime focus and pool our wisdom in support of this quest. We must adopt a philosophy that puts people first. This is the greatest challenge we face in the 21st century.

Human rights must be connected to people's actual happiness. We must create an age in which all people can equally enjoy peace, happiness, and fulfillment. To that end, let us strive for a restoration of humanity, for a renewed focus on the human being.

Buddhism is a humanistic teaching.

For many people, religion calls to mind churches, temples, and donations. But Shakyamuni, the founder of Buddhism, eschewed formality and the trappings of power. He exemplified an ordinary human being to the end of his days. Nichiren, whose teachings the Soka Gakkai upholds, was the same. For Nichiren, one's behavior as a human being was all important. In that sense, Buddhism is a teaching that doesn't fit in the same category as other religions.

Shakyamuni was an ordinary human being. So was Nichiren. They were no different from their followers. They didn't discriminate against women. Everyone was equal in their eyes.

Buddhism is a teaching for people. Its excellence lies in teaching us the importance of cherishing all life and living in harmony with nature and the universe.

From an interview commemorating the publication of the Bulgarian edition of Utsukushiki shishi no tamashii (The Beauty of a Lion's Heart), published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, August 10, 2000.

Section 31.7: Respecting the Dignity of All People

The Soka Gakkai is dedicated to fostering people of true humanity who live in accord with the humanistic principles of Nichiren Buddhism, respecting the dignity of all people. In this selection, President Ikeda discusses the Soka Gakkai's core mission.

In a well-known passage, Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"The heart of the Buddha's lifetime of teachings is the Lotus Sutra, and the heart of the practice of the Lotus Sutra is found in the 'Never Disparaging' chapter. What does Bodhisattva Never Disparaging's profound respect for people signify? The purpose of the appearance in this world of Shakyamuni Buddha, the lord of teachings, lies in his behavior as a human being. The wise may be called human, but the thoughtless are no more than animals" (WND-1, 852).

Note on terminology: Bodhisattva Never Disparaging is described in the "Bodhisattva Never Disparaging" chapter of the Lotus Sutra. This bodhisattva—Shakyamuni in a previous lifetime—lived at the end of the Middle Day of the Law, after the death of the Buddha Awesome Sound King. He would bow to everyone he met and say: "I have profound reverence for you, I would never dare treat you with disparagement or arrogance. Why? Because you will all practice the bodhisattva way and will then be able to attain Buddhahood" (LSOC20, 308). However, he was attacked by arrogant people, who beat him with sticks and staves and threw stones at him. The sutra explains that this practice became the cause for Bodhisattva Never Disparaging to attain Buddhahood.

He is saying that those who are wise in their behavior and way of living are truly human. Just being born in human form doesn't make us so. It requires wise, conscious efforts to be genuinely human. Foolish, thoughtless actions that denigrate and disrespect others makes us no more than animals.

Buddhism elucidates what it means to respect the dignity of all people from the most fundamental dimension of life itself. It is not merely a contemplative philosophy, but a practical life philosophy for living our lives in the real world.

Buddhism enables us to concretely express our true dignity and recognize the dignity of others, making both a reality in daily life. It teaches the supreme practice of affirming the dignity of both oneself and others.

The Soka Gakkai is a realm in which members strive to live by this fundamental spirit of Buddhism and always respect one another. It is an organization dedicated to promoting a way of life that respects the dignity of all people. It is a realm committed to fostering individuals of genuine humanity through such efforts.

Society has various different spheres—those devoted to creating things, those that produce economic or artistic value, and even those that prepare for war. Among all these, the Soka Gakkai is a precious realm that, grounded in the correct teaching of Nichiren Buddhism, is dedicated to the happiness, development, and growth of people, who are the foundation of all social activity. The mission of spreading Nichiren Buddhism is profound, sublime, and on a completely different level from all other realms of human endeavor.

Our aim is to lead lives that are rich and fulfilling, characterized by respect for the noble dignity of human life. At the same time, we stand resolutely opposed to any action that denigrates people and violates their dignity.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, June 21, 1988.

Section 31.8: A Realm of Boundless Inspiration

The Soka Gakkai has embraced the mission of fostering capable individuals in every sphere of human activity, enriching society through its contributions in the fields of peace, culture, and education and inspiring people to realize their full potential. In this excerpt from The Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) describes a conversation between himself and his mentor, Josei Toda, about the social mission of the Soka Gakkai. It took place right after the Soka Gakkai's great victory in the 1956 Osaka Campaign.

Note on terminology: The Osaka Campaign took place in May 1956, when the Kansai members, uniting around a young Daisaku Ikeda, who had been dispatched by second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda to support them, introduced 11,111 households to the practice of Nichiren Buddhism. In elections held two months later, the Soka Gakkai-backed candidate in Kansai won a seat in the Upper House, an accomplishment that was thought all but impossible at the time.

"As kosen-rufu advances," said Toda, "we will foster capable individuals in every area of society. There will be Soka Gakkai members sincerely striving for the prosperity of society and peace for humankind in every arena—politics, business, the academic world, the arts, education. Wherever you look, in whatever field, you will find someone who is a Soka Gakkai member. This, I think, is what an age in which kosen-rufu is being achieved will actually look like.

"I believe that the Soka Gakkai will have the mission to play a central role in promoting peace and culture for all humankind. Shin, the Soka Gakkai will become a magnificent educational movement fostering capable people for that purpose. Our focus must be on nurturing people. Shin, our movement for human revolution will spread around the world."

As Toda was talking with Shin'ichi, he found himself sharing a vision for the future of kosen-rufu. Its outlines took shape as he spoke.

Gazing into the distance as if seeing that image unfolding before him, Shin'ichi said: "So the Soka Gakkai will nourish every aspect of society and become a magnificent source of inspiration for all people. That's a grand vision, isn't it? It promises that a bright new future will open before humanity's eyes—though I guess it will be a long time coming."

"You say a long time," Toda replied, "but I don't think it will take a hundred years. Of course, I don't expect it to happen in my lifetime. It will be in yours, Shin. Toward the very end of your life, I imagine, that trend will have become quite evident."

He continued: "I am certain that the Soka Gakkai will become the king of the religious world. The Daishonin writes: '[The Lotus Sutra] is superior to all other sutras. It is like the lion king, the monarch of all the creatures that run on the ground, and like the eagle, the king of all the creatures that fly in the sky' (WND-1, 929–30). Nichiren Buddhism is clearly the monarch of all philosophies and systems of thought, and it is the Soka Gakkai that has arisen to spread this great Buddhism throughout the world.

"That's why it is the mission of the Soka Gakkai to send truly excellent, capable individuals who embrace the Gohonzon into every area of society. Each person's exemplary efforts at human revolution will contribute immensely to human society in the coming century.

"When observed over the long term, it is clear that political systems and governments change and evolve over time. We mustn't allow ourselves to become preoccupied with such shifting realities. Unless we focus on people themselves, we will be unable to carry out the task of kosen-rufu, the transformation of our troubled society into a Land of Tranquil Light.

Note on terminology: The Land of Tranquil Light, also called Land of Eternally Tranquil Light, is the Buddha land, which is free from impermanence and impurity. In many sutras, the actual saha world in which human beings dwell is described as an impure land filled with delusions and sufferings, while the Buddha land is described as a pure land free from these and far removed from this saha world. In contrast, the Lotus Sutra reveals the saha world to be the Buddha land, or the Land of Eternally Tranquil Light, and explains that the nature of a land is determined by the minds of its inhabitants.

"Today, the public may misapprehend our efforts. Not a single person may understand us. That's fine. We have no need to be in the spotlight. But the time will certainly come when we will astonish everyone. Then, they will finally grasp the import of this great unprecedented undertaking of kosen-rufu and shower us with praise."

From The Human Revolution, volume 10, "Future Perspective" chapter.

Section 31.9: A University without Walls

In this selection, President Ikeda stresses that educating and fostering people is a vital undertaking that will ensure the lasting success of any endeavor. He describes the Soka Gakkai as a "university without walls" dedicated to humanistic education.

The Soka Gakkai is engaged in a worldwide movement for peace, culture, and education, based on Buddhism. As a whole, it may be described as a "university without walls." It is a wide-ranging realm of humanistic education, grounded among the people, that nurtures individuals and fosters them into humanistic leaders. This educational role is what prompts me to speak to our members on so many different subjects.

Currents of thought and spiritual legacies have tremendous influence over human events. Now we of the Soka Gakkai are engaged in creating the current for a great spiritual civilization that will endure for tens of thousands of years. There can be no doubt that with time the current we are creating will grow into a mighty river and eventually expand into a vast ocean.

Viewed from this long-term perspective, you can see how foolish it would be to be swept away by momentary superficial ripples. I ask you to cultivate an expansive state of mind and lead noble lives that accord with our great objective.

In a sense, no endeavor is more profoundly important than education. Recently, when I was asked to write something on the first page of the visitors' book at the Kansai Soka schools, I penned the following message: "Education is the most sacred task in life."

Only a human being can foster another human being. It takes a person of genuine humanity to raise a person of genuine humanity. For teachers, of course, but also for every one of you, earnestly striving to foster people is the noblest task you can undertake in this life, one that has lasting value.

From a speech at a Kansai Region chapter leaders meeting, Osaka, February 2, 1989.

Section 31.10: Education: The Foundation for Peace

President Ikeda has consistently stated that a world filled with the laughter of mothers and children is one of genuine peace. In this selection, he stresses that humanistic education is the key to building an indestructible foundation for peace.

"In children's shining eyes, do we see national borders? In their laughing voices, do we hear ethnic differences? When they are sad, do their tears differ according to their religion? Bringing peace to the world's children—this is the earnest wish of humankind."

All the world's children have the right to live in peace. In every country, mothers and children want to lead peaceful and secure lives together with their families. But, in reality, even this modest wish remains unfulfilled for countless families.

The American civil rights leader Martin Luther King Jr. observed: "Injustice anywhere is a threat to justice everywhere."

This message could be recast as: "War anywhere is a threat to peace everywhere." We cannot truly be at peace or enjoy happiness as long as somewhere on our planet people are threatened by war or suffer from starvation.

How can we build peace? I believe that the surest, most fundamental path to peace is found in truly humanistic education.

Looking back over human history, we are confronted with the paradox that wars are most often started by people with the highest levels of education, members of society's elite. This is indeed one of the great tragedies of humankind. Individuals who have received a fine education, pursued learning, and acquired knowledge have failed to use these accomplishments to help the people and ensure peace. Instead, they have used them to assert their superiority over others and to profit personally.

Moreover, the interests of the state have often taken precedence over people's needs—a situation that continues to this day. This can only be described as an abuse of education.

When I was a child, the Japanese educational system was designed to support the war and glorify the nation. At that very time, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, founder of Soka education, declared that the purpose of education is the happiness of children. He refused to let government oppression intimidate him, and ultimately brought his noble life to a close in prison.

I believe that now more than ever we need to widely implement the kind of education for peace and happiness that Mr. Makiguchi advocated. We must teach children the preciousness of life and a spirit of respect for others. We must foster in them courage and awareness as world citizens and help them develop the wisdom to put their knowledge to work for the happiness of all people.

That is the way to build an indestructible foundation for peace in the 21st century. Indeed, it is the only way.

From the preface to Haha to ko no seiki (The Century of Mothers and Children), volume 3, published in Japanese in May 2002.

Section 31.11: Our Legacy to Humanity

President Ikeda is the founder of Soka University of America, located in Aliso Viejo, Orange County, California. To date, he has founded a total of 15 educational institutions in seven countries and territories, including Soka University, Soka Women's College, the Tokyo and Kansai Soka schools, and the Sapporo Soka Kindergarten in Japan; Soka kindergartens in Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia, and South Korea; and the Brazil Soka schools. In a message to the dedication ceremony of SUA, he speaks of his deep commitment to education.

My own commitment to education was further deepened by my encounters with Arnold Toynbee, one of the great historians of the 20th century.

Our first meeting was in spring, the mayflower time, of 1972. We met at Professor Toynbee's home in London. At the time, he was 83 and I was 44.

At the start of our discussion, I expressed my hope that our conversations would offer some suggestions to the people of the future, that they might find some hints for resolving the issues they will face.

I will never forget his response: "I, too, think in terms of the next century. I am much concerned, as you are, about what's going to happen long after even you, and certainly I, are no longer in this world."

What does one leave to humanity after one's passing? From Professor Toynbee, I learned and reconfirmed the importance of living one's life focused on that overarching question.

For me, the answer is education. It is the university.

The embracing nature of genuine education makes it a force for peace. It can correct and restrain the tendency of religion to become dogmatic, for example. It can connect and build bonds between people the world over.

More than any other human institution, the university can serve as a source of illumination and hope, lighting with wisdom humanity's path into the far future.

Another crucial point Professor Toynbee stressed was this: "A human being can be manipulated insofar as he can be dehumanized." Nothing more glaringly exemplifies this truth than education—indoctrination—that glorifies, promotes, and perpetuates war.

During the dark and maddened days of World War II, the first and second presidents of the Soka Gakkai, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi and Josei Toda, struggled, at the risk and cost of life itself, to challenge such war-promoting education and to protect people's humanity from manipulations. As a result, Japan's military authorities suppressed the Soka Gakkai, jailing both men as thought criminals. The father of Soka education, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, died in prison at age 73.

To bequeath to humankind an eternally enduring monument of humanity and justice, an imperishable bastion for the culture of peace—this was the burning desire of the first and second presidents of the Soka Gakkai. I believe that has been the anguished cry and hope of all those whose rights and lives have been trampled by violence and tyranny. SUA has been built in an effort to fulfill those hopes and dreams.

President Makiguchi declared that happiness is the true goal and purpose of education. In this land of hope, dedicated to pursuing the universal value of happiness, SUA will strive always to be an institution of higher learning dedicated first and foremost to human happiness.

This is our belief and conviction: That all people on Earth have the right to happiness. That all people inherently possess the capacity for lasting happiness. That it is through fulfilling their unique and noble purpose in life that each person may realize maximum happiness both for themselves and for others.

The world needs leaders who possess the kind of philosophy and vision that can awaken each individual to that unique mission, that can bring forth that capacity for happiness, that can unify humankind toward the noble goal of peace. Education that fosters such leaders is our foremost necessity.

From a message sent to the dedication ceremony of Soka University of America, May 3, 2001.

Section 31.12: Kosen-rufu Is a Great Cultural Movement

It has always been President Ikeda's conviction that the Soka Gakkai's culture-related activities are accessible ways to communicate the joy and elevated life state attained through Buddhist faith and practice. In accord with his guidance, the Soka Gakkai has promoted a grassroots cultural movement through such events as music and culture festivals. At a Headquarters leaders meeting commemorating the 50th anniversary of the young men's and young women's divisions, President Ikeda speaks of the significance of the Soka Gakkai's cultural activities as represented by the Music Corps and the Fife and Drum Corps.

Many thanks to the young men's Music Corps, brilliant musicians of kosen-rufu! Founded in May 1954, the Music Corps has consistently inspired and encouraged our members with its rousing performances for almost five decades. I would like to present them with the following poem:

"Ah, the Music Corps! and its melodies of the Buddhas and heavenly deities even amid the storm..."

On the day of the Osaka Rally on July 17, 1957, members of the Music Corps gathered from early in the morning on the riverbank in Osaka's Nakanoshima area. There, they played Soka Gakkai songs with all their might, hoping that their music would reach me where I was being held in detention on false charges by the authorities. I could hear them very clearly. I will never forget that courageous sound.

Note on terminology: The Osaka Rally was a Soka Gakkai rally held to protest the unjust detention of President Ikeda, then Soka Gakkai youth division chief of staff, by the Osaka District Prosecutor's Office in connection with the Osaka Incident. It was convened at the Nakanoshima Civic Hall in Osaka on July 17, 1957, the day of President Ikeda's release after two weeks of interrogation by the authorities.

My thanks, too, to the young women's Fife and Drum Corps, those emissaries of peace. I would like to praise them with a poem:

"The Fife and Drum Corps—shining vibrantly in this tumultuous world."

One has but to mention the Fife and Drum Corps and everyone wants to go and hear them play. The members have accumulated immense benefits as a result of steadfastly spreading the light of peace.

It was in 1956, in our humble home in Kobayashi-cho in Tokyo's Ota Ward, that my wife and I, along with several representatives of the young women's division, discussed ideas for forming such a group. That was the beginning of today's Fife and Drum Corps.

Bodhisattva Wonderful Sound, who appears in the Lotus Sutra, is said to be accompanied wherever he goes by the music of hundreds and thousands of heavenly musicians. "The Bodhisattva Wonderful Sound" chapter of the Lotus Sutra says: "The lands that he (Bodhisattva Wonderful Sound) passed through on his way quaked and trembled in six different ways, and in all of them seven-jeweled lotus flowers rained down and the instruments of hundreds and thousands of heavenly musicians sounded of themselves without having been struck" (LSOC24, 334).

In one of his writings, Nichiren Daishonin cites the words: "We can discern a country's rise and fall by whether its tones are happy or sad" (GZ, 88). Namely, the sounds prevailing in society at any given time can help us understand a country's future, whether it is destined to flourish or decline. These sounds are the sounds of human voices and, by extension, of culture and the arts, including, of course, music.

Kosen-rufu is a great cultural movement that deeply values music and the arts. It was based on the fundamental values and principles of Buddhism that I established the Music Corps and the Fife and Drum Corps.

When I asked Mr. Toda if I could do so, he simply said: "If you'll take full responsibility, Daisaku, go right ahead!" I purchased a few instruments out of my own pocket and donated them to the original members—16 in the Music Corps and 33 in the Fife and Drum Corps. Today, these groups each boast some 20,000 members in Japan, and many of their constituent groups have won top prizes in national competitions.

These achievements are remarkable. The activities of these groups in themselves constitute a great artistic and cultural movement. This "network of Bodhisattvas Wonderful Sound" has today spread to some 30 countries and territories. Time and again, Music Corps and Fife and Drum Corps groups around the world have taken part in important national events and won high acclaim, creating a superlative record of achievement. I would like to wholeheartedly applaud these groups for becoming the best in the world.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, November 12, 2001.

Section 31.13: The Power of Art to Bring People Together

The Soka Gakkai, in accord with President Ikeda's guidance, has consistently affirmed the value of culture and worked to unite people through it. In this selection, President Ikeda describes the importance of cultural exchange.

"Art is a song of the joy of living. Art is a force for bringing people together. Art is a dance of life's victory, crossing stormy seas to reach the shores of peace."

The power of culture can be hard to discern, but it is a force that illuminates the innermost depths of people's hearts, draws forth their wisdom and ingenuity, and shapes the deep underlying currents that will steadily but surely move human history in the direction of peace and prosperity for all.

Revitalizing the value of culture and widely promoting cultural exchange on the grassroots level is the direct path to strengthening the momentum leading to world peace. It was with that conviction that I founded the Min-On Concert Association in 1963, when there seemed to be no way out of the Cold War conflict, and later other institutions, including the Tokyo Fuji Art Museum.

To whom does culture belong? For whom does it exist? It is for the people, for all people. No matter how splendid works of art or culture may appear, if they disregard this essential point, they will not endure, like castles built on sand.

Similarly, friendship between nations ultimately begins with the people of those nations getting to know one another well. In every country and social system, society is formed of and supported by the people. When the people of different nations develop mutual understanding through cultural exchange, they will be able to cultivate the ground for lasting peace.

From an article contributed to The Okinawa Times, published in Japanese, December 2, 2003.

Section 31.14: Restoring the Poetic Spirit

President Ikeda has stressed that one means for reviving contemporary civilization is restoring the poetic spirit—the topic of this column he contributed to The Japan Times, a leading English-language newspaper in Japan.

"In the sea of sky the waves of cloud rise up, and the moon-boat is seen rowing out of sight into the forest of the stars."

This waka-style poem was written some thirteen hundred years ago. It is included in the Man'yoshu (A Collection of Ten Thousand Leaves), the oldest extant collection of Japanese poems.

Today, we have sent human beings beyond the reaches of Earth's atmosphere; we have stood on the surface of the moon. Yet, reading this poem, one has to wonder if people in ancient times didn't sense the presence of the moon and stars more intimately than we do today. Is it possible they lived richer, more expansive lives than we, who for all our material comfort, rarely remember to look up to the sky?

Immersed in material distractions, clamor, and bustle, contemporary humanity has been cut off from the vastness of the universe, from the eternal flow of time. We struggle against feelings of isolation and alienation. We seek to slake the heart's thirst by pursuing pleasures, only to find that our cravings have grown that much more fierce.

This separation and estrangement is, in my view, the underlying tragedy of contemporary civilization. Divorced from the cosmos, from nature, from society, and from each other, we have become fractured and fragmented.

Science and technology have given humanity undreamed-of power, bringing invaluable benefits to our lives and health. But this has been paralleled by a tendency to distance ourselves from our surroundings, to objectify and reduce everything around us to numbers and things. Even people become things. The victims of war are presented as statistics; we are numbed to individual realities of unspeakable suffering and grief.

In contrast, the eyes of a poet discover in each person a unique and irreplaceable humanity. While arrogant intellect seeks to control and manipulate the world, the poetic spirit bows with reverence before its mysteries.

Human beings are each a microcosm. Living here on Earth, we breathe the rhythms of a universe that extends infinitely above us. When resonant harmonies arise between this vast outer cosmos and the inner human cosmos, poetry is born.

At one time, perhaps, all people were poets, in intimate dialogue with Nature. In Japan, the Man'yoshu collection comprised poems written by people of all classes. And almost half of the poems are marked "poet unknown."

These poems were not written in order to leave behind a name. Poems and songs penned as an unstoppable outpouring of the heart take on a life of their own. They transcend the limits of nationality and time as they pass from person to person, from one heart to another.

The poetic spirit can be found in any human endeavor. It may be vibrantly active in the heart of a scientist engaged in research in the awed pursuit of truth. When the spirit of poetry lives within us, even objects do not appear as mere things; our eyes are trained on an inner spiritual reality. A flower is not just a flower. The moon is no mere clump of matter floating in the skies. Our gaze fixed on a flower or the moon, we intuitively perceive the unfathomable bonds that link us to the world.

In this sense, children are poets by nature, by birth. Treasuring and nurturing their poetic hearts, enabling them to grow, will also lead adults into realms of fresh discovery. We do not, after all, exist simply to fulfill desires. Real happiness is not found in more possessions, but through creating a harmony with the world at the core of our being.

The poetic spirit has the power to "retune" and reconnect a discordant, divided world. True poets stand firm, rooted in life's complex, conflicted, and fissured reality. Harm done to anyone, anywhere, causes agony in the poet's heart. Yet, the poet intrepidly steps forward to offer people words of courage and hope, seeking to share a perspective—one step deeper, one step higher—that enables them to perceive the enduring spiritual realities of our lives.

Now more than ever, we need the thunderous, rousing voice of poetry. We need the poet's impassioned songs of peace, of the shared and mutually supportive existence of all things. We need to reawaken the poetic spirit within us, the youthful, vital energy and wisdom that enable us to live to the fullest. We must all be poets.

Our planet is scarred and damaged, its ecosystems threatened with collapse. We must shade and protect Earth with "leaves of language" arising from the depths of life. Modern civilization will be healthy only when the poetic spirit regains its rightful place.

From an essay titled "Restoring Our Connections with the World," published in The Japan Times, October 12, 2006.

Section 31.16: Reviving the Culture of the Written Word

President Ikeda has consistently underscored the important role that literary culture has played in the development and progress of humankind. He explains that a defining feature of Soka Gakkai activities is a spirit of learning based on the written word.

A tradition of studying and learning together is embedded in the Soka Gakkai's day-to-day activities. Our members of all ages are eternal learners. They study the writings of Nichiren Daishonin at monthly discussion meetings. They also read, listen, and study intently at various other group meetings.

At the heart of Nichiren Daishonin's teachings is the understanding that everything in our lives and the world is Buddhism, that "all phenomena are the Buddhist Law" (WND-2, 848).

That's why we also make efforts to read and learn from novels—for instance, the works of great authors such as Tolstoy, Goethe, and Hugo. We strive to gain an understanding of economics and politics, of art and music. We seek to acquire wisdom and insights on all aspects of life. That is our spirit. This is also where we find the Soka Gakkai's strength. The term gakkai, after all, means "a study association or society."

It has always been my hope that our young people, in particular, will read good books and familiarize themselves with good writing.

Reading books is also the way to inherit the intellectual legacy of humankind.

Whereas reading stimulates and develops our minds, helping us acquire critical thinking skills, watching television is a very passive way of receiving information, and its images can be deceptive.

There is a need to revive authentic writing issuing from the profound depths of the human spirit in order to counteract writing that is full of lies and deliberate misrepresentation.

I spent the highly impressionable years of my late teens amid the chaos and confusion of the immediate postwar period. Having been denied learning during the war, we young people hungrily sought new knowledge.

I participated in a reading group with several youth in my neighborhood. Books were scarce, so we borrowed and lent those we had among ourselves. Though I was poor, I treasured books as my most prized possessions. The shelves in my room contained books both classic and modern, from both East and West, mainly works of literature.

My most ardent wish at the time was to establish a deep, solid view of life. So when some old school friends invited me to a meeting, saying there was to be a discussion of "life philosophy," I agreed to go.

It was at that meeting that I first encountered Josei Toda, who later became the second president of the Soka Gakkai. I was deeply moved by his impressive character and his profound compassion for people who were suffering. It is no exaggeration to say that most of my education from that time on came through personal instruction from Mr. Toda.

He always urged young people to make time in their lives for reading and contemplation. Almost every day, he would ask me what book I was reading, with a strictness that seemed more an interrogation than a casual question. I didn't dare meet Mr. Toda without having done any reading. All my earnest struggles in reading and studying in those days have now borne fruit as my greatest strength and treasure.

After becoming Soka Gakkai president, Mr. Toda devoted himself wholeheartedly to training the members of the young men's and young women's divisions. He started by having us read a number of great works of world literature, including The Romance of the Three Kingdoms, The Water Margin, A Tale of Two Cities, The Count of Monte Cristo, and Ninety-Three.

Encouraging us to share our thoughts and impressions, answering our many questions freely and sometimes even providing individual advice, he fostered each one of us and helped us develop our potential. In the process, he covered the many different kinds of problems we might encounter in the course of life.

There is a limit to what one person can experience in a single lifetime. But by reading, we can incorporate the experiences of others in our own lives. We can learn the profundity of life and the vastness of the world, gain insight into human nature, and cultivate the ability to see and understand society.

With every training session, we young people grew by leaps and bounds.

Reading is a lifelong treasure. It is a precious source of spiritual nourishment. It is the foundation for all forms of learning. Reading develops the ability to think and broadens our horizons.

To create a positive future, we must learn good lessons from the past. The 20th century was a time of remarkable material progress on the one hand, but the lag in spiritual progress has created a situation in which the very survival of humankind is threatened. That is why we must make the 21st century an age of great spiritual progress.

From Haha no mai (Dance of Mothers), published in Japanese in January 2000.

Section 31.17: A Humanistic Newspaper—the Seikyo Shimbun

The Seikyo Shimbun, the Soka Gakkai's newspaper, was born through the united efforts of Presidents Toda and Ikeda, with its first issue published on April 20, 1951. In this selection, President Ikeda writes about the starting point and mission of the Seikyo Shimbun, which continues to impart hope and courage to people around the world.

Mr. Toda first mentioned the idea of starting a Soka Gakkai newspaper in August 1950. This was right at the time when the credit union he ran fell into financial difficulty and was forced to suspend business operations.

That day, August 24, Mr. Toda and I had gone to a coffee shop in Tokyo's Toranomon area to meet with a newspaper reporter who had learned of the credit union's business suspension. On our way back, Mr. Toda said to me with great feeling: "Newspapers have more power than you can imagine in today's world. Owning a newspaper means having tremendous influence. The Soka Gakkai needs to have its own paper someday, preferably soon. Daisaku, please put your mind to it."

Four months later, in December, in a cheap restaurant near Tokyo's Shimbashi Station, he brought up the subject to me again, saying decisively: "Let's start a newspaper, a Soka Gakkai newspaper. We are entering an age of mass media." Though facing a barrage of criticism because of his business troubles, he dauntlessly kept looking toward the distant future of kosen-rufu.

Then, one cold night in February 1951, he said to me: "Let's get started on the newspaper now. I'll be the president, and you be vice president. Let's be bold!" I will never forget how heroic he looked as he said this.

The first issue of the Seikyo Shimbun came out two months later, on April 20. Initially a single sheet printed on both sides, the paper was published once every 10 days with a run of 5,000 copies. Today, it is a daily paper with a circulation of 5.5 million. When I think of this phenomenal growth, those early days seem like a lifetime ago. The paper began with a small step, but Mr. Toda's vision for it was grand.

When discussing names, there were several proposals: Bunka Shimbun (Culture Newspaper), Soka Shimbun (Value-Creation Newspaper), and Sekai Shimbun (World Newspaper). Mr. Toda even suggested with a laugh: "Thinking far ahead in the future, how about we call it Uchu Shimbun (Universe Newspaper)?"

Eventually, we decided on Seikyo Shimbun (Sacred Teachings Newspaper)—after a term for the Daishonin's teachings—as Mr. Toda wished to create a newspaper that would communicate the essence of Nichiren Buddhism, the fundamental Law of the universe, to people all over the world.

For the first issue, Mr. Toda personally penned the main front-page article, titled "What Is Faith?" He also contributed an installment of his serialized novel, Ningen kakumei (Human Revolution), and a column named "Suntetsu" (Epigrams), both of which he continued writing tirelessly along with other articles for subsequent issues.

I, too, wrote articles, as well as a column introducing historical figures, such as Lord Byron, the English poet of revolution and passion; Beethoven, the great musician who struggled with destiny; and Napoleon, the hero of youthful advance.

I also remember with nostalgia how, as the head of the public relations department, I wrote many hard-hitting articles, full of youthful passion, to correct the false and inaccurate reporting on the Soka Gakkai by other media. I was determined that the Seikyo Shimbun would always report the truth.

Both Mr. Toda and I poured our lives into writing articles for the paper, regarding them as personal letters to our dear fellow members.

Mr. Toda used to say that he wanted the people of Japan and the world to read our paper. From the beginning of 1956—the year the paper would celebrate its fifth anniversary—he started to send it to heads of government throughout Asia. The list of recipients numbered 10, including Jawaharlal Nehru, the prime minister of India; Ramon Magsaysay, the president of the Philippines; Mao Zedong, the chairman of the People's Republic of China; and Zhou Enlai, China's premier. In the accompanying letter, Mr. Toda wrote: "It is my hope that this newspaper may prove useful in deepening your understanding of Buddhism in some small way and thereby contribute to your even greater endeavors for the development of Eastern civilization."

Mr. Toda regarded the Seikyo Shimbun as a means for opening the way to friendship and peace in Asia. Many laughed at his efforts, calling them absurd, but I have devoted myself to realizing those ideals, acting without hesitation to fulfill his wishes.

Mahatma Gandhi, the great human rights champion born in the East, continued to publish his newspapers even while in prison. The autobiography he began writing at that time was also serialized in them, and tens of millions of readers devoured every installment. It was through newspapers that he articulated his belief in nonviolent resistance and inspired the people.

We, too, have used the Seikyo Shimbun to speak out for truth and justice, undeterred by opposition and harassment, and spread throughout the world a new humanism, Soka humanism, based on the Buddhism of Nichiren Daishonin.

A respected Japanese thinker has declared that today the Soka Gakkai and the Seikyo Shimbun are the conscience of Japan.

All of this is due solely to our members' noble efforts.

Our world right now, at the century's close, is clouded in gloom. Misinformation and lies run rampant. Society seems lost in a maze, without any guiding philosophy.

Against that background, it is the mission of the Seikyo Shimbun, a paper dedicated to speaking out for truth and justice, to rise like a sun of hope and illuminate the 21st century.

I will write. I am determined to continue writing. Let us all join forces to further develop this magnificent "bastion of the pen" of the people.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, April 15, 1998.

Section 31.18: Making Art Available to All

In May 1973, President Ikeda founded the Fuji Art Museum in Shizuoka Prefecture, and in November 1983, the Tokyo Fuji Art Museum in Hachioji. In 2008, the Shizuoka museum closed and merged with the Tokyo Fuji Art Museum. Both institutions were a culmination of his efforts to promote cultural exchange, realized in collaboration with noted figures in the fields of art and culture around the world. In this selection, he recounts his motivation in establishing these art museums.

In November this year, the Tokyo Fuji Art Museum will celebrate its 22nd anniversary. Over the years since its founding, it has developed into one of Japan's leading private galleries, a premier repository of art and beauty.

With its guiding principle of serving as a "Portal to the World," the Tokyo Fuji Art Museum has held numerous exhibitions featuring some of the world's greatest masterpieces. Its collection includes some 30,000 works of Japanese, Asian, and Western art, covering a wide range of genres.

The core of the museum's collection of Western paintings was formed with the assistance of the late Rene Huyghe, an internationally acclaimed art historian. Mr. Huyghe served as chief curator of drawings and paintings at the Louvre in Paris. During World War II, he risked his life to save many priceless art treasures of humanity from the occupying Nazi forces. I spoke with Mr. Huyghe multiple times, and we published a dialogue together, titled Dawn After Dark.

With his rich experience and expert eye, Mr. Huyghe provided extremely helpful and informed advice from the earliest planning stages of the museum, including the formation of the Western painting collection and suggestions for exhibitions. He played an instrumental role in the success of the museum's opening exhibition, "Masterpieces of French Art" in 1983–84, as well as "The Life, People and Nobles in 18th-Century France" in 1986–87, "The French Revolution and Romanticism" in 1987, and others. He continued to offer his advice and support until his death at the age of 90 in 1997. His guidance and instruction remain an invaluable guide for the museum to this day.

One of the purposes of an art museum is to make works of art previously enjoyed only by a privileged few available to the general public. The mission of the Tokyo Fuji Art Museum is just that—to provide ordinary citizens with the opportunity to experience first-rate works of art, making art accessible to all.

Genuine beauty moves us. The soul of art uplifts and inspires us, infusing our lives with fresh strength and vigor. Culture and education cultivate and enrich the human spirit, and are the foundation for building peace.

I can still hear the deep resonant voice of Mr. Huyghe saying that materialism is the cause of war and insisting that we must make our way through the desert of materialism to regenerate a vibrant "inner richness." He called our friendship a "spiritual united front" dedicated to reviving the human spirit.

Let us energetically continue our own spiritual struggle, our efforts in the sphere of culture and education, to counter the savage materialism that lays waste to civilization. This is the path to peace and a future of true humanism.

From a speech at an education and culture conference, Tokyo, September 12, 2005.

Section 31.19: Bringing the World Together through Culture

President Ikeda founded the Min-On Concert Association—Min-On literally meaning "the people's music"—in October 1963. In this excerpt, he shares what inspired him to do so and the institution's achievements in bringing people closer together through music and other performing arts.

Music speaks to the heart, striking universal inner chords to create a harmony of empathy and friendship. It can rouse our courage, inspire a prayer for peace, and awaken our sense of pride and dignity. Such are the beneficial powers of music.

From my youth, I dreamed of uniting people through music and creating a beautiful melody of culture and peace throughout the world.

This October, the Min-On Concert Association celebrated its 40th anniversary. Since its establishment, it has sponsored more than 60,000 performances across a wide range of genres—from orchestral and chamber music, opera and ballet, to pop music, tango, and folk dance.

Whether it be literature or music, my mentor, Josei Toda, always encouraged us to try to experience the best the arts have to offer.

Listening to the masterworks of Beethoven on a hand-cranked gramophone in my youth was a source of incredible encouragement. It infused me with the strength I needed to get through those extremely trying times.

Even in 1960, when I became Soka Gakkai president, classical music concerts and stage performances in general were beyond the reach of most ordinary people. They seemed unconnected to people's lives. But it was not right for the arts to remain closed off and accessible only to a privileged few—this was an age where ordinary people were increasingly taking center stage.

I wanted to make the great music that was a treasure of humankind available to all. That was my motivation in establishing Min-On. I worked very hard and overcame many difficulties to make it a reality.

When I founded Min-On, one of my dreams was to invite to Japan the Teatro alla Scala (La Scala), the leading Italian opera company. Many scoffed at the idea, ridiculing it and dismissing it as impossible. But eventually—after 16 years of negotiations—we succeeded, and in 1981, La Scala gave a magnificent series of performances for the Japanese public. Carlo Maria Badini, La Scala's superintendent at the time, describing the scope of this tour, said that the troupe had brought everything but the building itself to Japan.

Ordinary people are the foundation of the world. When the music of peace reverberates among people far and wide, the light of goodness and beauty will envelop society and, indeed, the entire world.

In 1966, three years after its founding, Min-On invited the Soviet National Academy Novosibirsk Ballet to perform as the first in its World Ballet Series. It was the height of the Cold War, when attention was focused on that polarized political conflict. Fear of the Soviet Union was widespread. Yet even in that climate, the arrival in Japan of such beautiful cultural goodwill ambassadors stirred a warm response and brought flowers of friendship to blossom. Cultural exchange is a bridge to mutual understanding and a forerunner of peace.

Tensions between China and the Soviet Union resulted in a round of particularly challenging negotiations over the 1985 "Road towards Peace from Afar" tour. This was the fourth concert in the series "A Musical Voyage Along the Silk Road," which ultimately brought together performing artists from China, Turkey, Uzbekistan (then part of the Soviet Union), and Japan. The Min-On staff had firm faith that culture could overcome political differences and pressed on tenaciously in their negotiations. This was based on the conviction that, because all countries consist of the people who live there, there is no reason they couldn't understand one another as fellow human beings. When that passionate commitment to cultural exchange was communicated, both China and the Soviet Union gave the go-ahead.

The tour, consisting of 30 performances in 26 cities, was a great success. After it ended, I greeted the artists at the Seikyo Shimbun building in Shinanomachi, Tokyo. The leaders of each country's delegation of performers were unanimous in the belief that the tour would broaden the way to future peace and friendship. To me, their words resounded as a tribute to the victory of culture. Four years later, China and the Soviet Union had a dramatic reconciliation.

Music knows no barriers. It transcends national borders, languages, cultures, and ethnicity, bringing hearts together in a symphony of peace. This is the reason the Min-On Concert Association has succeeded in cultural exchanges with 90 countries and territories. To me, this great road of cultural exchange uniting people is a Silk Road of the spirit.

I'm sure I am not alone in feeling that this magnificent spiritual Silk Road will continue to open ever more widely in tandem with the development of Min-On, which is committed to bringing the world together through culture.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, December 24, 2003.

Section 31.20: The Epitome of Human Harmony

President Ikeda introduces words of praise for the Soka Gakkai's activities from Lokesh Chandra, an eminent Indian scholar and authority on the Lotus Sutra, and affirms that the Soka Gakkai's humanistic network is a beacon of hope for humankind.

I have been engaged in a dialogue on the philosophies of the world with the Indian thinker Lokesh Chandra.

India is the birthplace of Buddhism and, likewise, the origin of the wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, making this exchange of ideas with one of India's leading intellectuals especially significant for me. The serialization of our dialogue will soon come to a close. The dialogue was originally serialized in the Soka Gakkai study journal, the Daibyakurenge. It was published in English in book form in 2009, under the title Buddhism: A Way of Values.

Toward the end of our dialogue, Dr. Chandra generously praised our Soka movement, saying that our contributions to humanity embody a passage in the "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra. He then recited the following lines, which are also part of our daily gongyo: "This, my land, remains safe and tranquil, constantly filled with heavenly and human beings" (LSOC16, 272).

It appears as part of this longer portion of the verse section that reads:

"When living beings witness the end of a kalpa and all is consumed in a great fire, this, my land, remains safe and tranquil, constantly filled with heavenly and human beings. The halls and pavilions in its gardens and groves are adorned with various kinds of gems. Jeweled trees abound in flowers and fruit where living beings enjoy themselves at ease. The gods strike heavenly drums, constantly making many kinds of music. Mandarava blossoms rain down, scattering over the Buddha and the great assembly" (LSOC16, 272).

Note on terminology: Buddhist cosmology posits four kalpas or the four periods of time corresponding to the four stages in the cycle of formation, continuance, decline, and disintegration that a world is said to undergo. One complete cycle of the four kalpas is called a major kalpa.

Note on terminology: Mandarava blossoms are flowers said to bloom in heaven. They are fragrant, and their beauty delights those who see them. In Buddhist sutras, mandaravas and other heavenly flowers rain down from the heavens when a Buddha preaches or when other wonderful events occur.

The eminent Indian philosopher concluded that our Soka movement proclaims the joy of human existence, promotes a spiritual flowering, and strives to expand cooperation for peace, in perfect accord with these lines from the verse section of the "Life Span" chapter, which is the heart of the Lotus Sutra. He also stated that the Soka Gakkai is "unique in the world of today in making values central to life."

Transcending national borders and ethnic differences, the Soka Gakkai is helping one person after another reveal the highest life state of Buddhahood and shine as a "treasure tower" brimming with the "greatest of all joys" (OTT, 212). Our Soka Gakkai centers and training centers are like "the halls and pavilions in the gardens and groves" described in the sutra, serving as great bastions of security and prosperity in each community where they stand.

At the same time, the Soka Gakkai overflows with the power of humanistic education. The flowers of youth bloom fragrantly, and the fruit of victory adorns the lives of those in their golden years.

The Fife and Drum Corps, Music Corps, and our many choral groups continually treat us to wonderful musical performances. Our organization abounds with the creative power of culture, led by the vibrant activities of our Arts Division members.

Just as beautiful "mandarava blossoms rain down" from the heavens in the sutra, people all around the world shower the Soka Gakkai with trust, praise, and support.

Our united gathering of Soka is the epitome of human harmony. It is a model of creative coexistence and embodies the ideal of a culture of peace.

As members of the Soka Gakkai, which faithfully carries on the Daishonin's teachings, let us continue expanding, deepening, and fortifying our humanistic network—a beacon of hope for the new century—for the sake of world peace and the security of all humankind.

From a message sent to a nationwide prefecture leaders conference, November 13, 2001.

Section 31.21: Nothing Is More Barbarous Than War

In a message to young people, President Ikeda relates his personal experience of living through wartime, the starting point of his activities for peace.

On this occasion, I am reminded of my own youth. Sixty years ago, on August 15, 1945, World War II ended for Japan. I was 17 at the time, the same age as many of you, our high school students. My family lived in what is now Ota Ward, Tokyo. I was the fifth of eight children. One after another, my four older brothers had been drafted into the military and sent to battlefields in China and other regions.

My father, who ran a seaweed-processing business, suffered from rheumatism, which made it difficult for him to work. How painful it was for him to see his four sons, who were in the prime of their youth and a major support to him, taken off to war one after another. It was also incredibly hard for my mother.

My two younger brothers, my younger sister, and I were still at home. To contribute to the family finances in some small way, I delivered newspapers from the time I was in elementary school.

After graduating from the national people's school, I got a job at the nearby Niigata Steelworks in 1942, where one of my older brothers had been employed. It wasn't possible for me to continue my schooling because I had to help support my family.

We had all lived happily together in a spacious, two-story house up to the time I was in fifth grade in 1938. But as the clouds of war grew ever darker, we were forced to sell the house, and the property was later turned into a munitions factory. We moved to another house nearby, but were later ordered to evacuate so that the area could be turned into a firebreak amid the intensifying bombing raids over Tokyo.

We then decided to move to the home of my mother's younger sister, into a separate wing that would be added to the house. Once it was completed, we used a pull cart to haul our possessions there. It was the night of May 24, 1945, and we were all looking forward to living together in our new home the next day. In an air raid that night, however, it sustained a direct hit from an incendiary bomb and burned to the ground.

We somehow managed to save a single storage chest and bring it with us. When we opened it, however, it contained only my younger sister's traditional Girls' Day dolls. Overnight, we had lost literally everything. But despite this, my dauntless mother comforted and reassured us, saying: "I'm sure we'll live in a fine house again one day where we can display these dolls."

Even after the war ended, it was quite a while before my brothers returned home. We would look on with envy when we saw other demobilized soldiers coming home alive and well. It wasn't until May 1947 that we were notified of the death of my eldest brother, with whom I had been very close. I will never forget seeing my mother trying to hold back her tears when she received the tragic news.

In those days, I had tuberculosis. I suffered from drenching night sweats and painful coughing often accompanied by bloody phlegm. I was thin as a rail, and the doctor advised that I be sent to a sanatorium in Kashima, Ibaraki Prefecture, but it wasn't possible.

The war caused terrible suffering for my family and made my youth one of great hardship. Of course, we were by no means alone in this regard. Families across Japan endured untold misery—and not just in Japan, but across Asia and around the world, countless people through no fault of their own were tragically sacrificed in the war.

Nothing is more barbarous than war. Nothing more cruel. That's why I hate war and am forever opposed to the devilish nature of authority that causes it. My absolute commitment to pacifism, to fight for peace throughout my life, was engraved in my being when I was a youth.

From a message sent to the entrance ceremony of the Soka Junior and Senior High Schools in Tokyo and Kansai, April 8, 2005.

Supplementary Reading: "A Piece of Mirror"

President Ikeda knows from personal experience that it is mothers and children who suffer the most in war. This essay excerpt conveys his wish that all people can lead happy, secure lives.

I have in my possession a mirror. Actually, it's nothing more than a piece of broken glass about the size of my palm. It has fine scratches on both sides, but still functions perfectly as a looking glass. It is one of those bits of broken mirror, somewhat on the thick side, the kind that you might find in any trash heap. But to me it is a precious keepsake.

My parents married in 1915, and as part of her trousseau my mother brought along a dressing table fitted with a very nice mirror. No doubt that same mirror reflected the young bride in her wedding finery, casting back an image clear and undistorted.

Twenty years or so later, however, the mirror somehow or other was broken. My eldest brother, Kiichi, and I happened to be home at the time, and we sorted out the fragments and picked out two of the larger ones to keep for ourselves.

Not long after that, the war broke out. My four older brothers went off to the front one by one—some to fight in China, others in Southeast Asia. My mother, her four oldest sons taken away from her, tried not to show her grief; but she suddenly grew visibly older.

Then, the daily air raids on Tokyo began. It pained me to see my mother suffering. Thinking it might somehow protect her, I kept the piece of mirror always with me, carefully tucked inside my shirt, as I dodged my way through the firebombs that fell all around us.

After the war, when we finally received official notification that my eldest brother had been killed in the fighting in Burma (Myanmar), I couldn't help thinking of the piece of mirror I knew he must have been carrying in the breast pocket of his uniform. I could imagine him, during lulls in the fighting, taking it out and looking at his unshaven face, thinking longingly of his mother back home. I knew how he must have felt, because I had a piece of my mother's mirror, too. Learning he had died, I took out my piece of mirror and thought of him.

In the troubled times after Japan's defeat, I decided to leave home and moved into a small one-room apartment. It was spartan and bare, without so much as a mirror, but I had brought my piece of broken mirror with me and kept it in my desk drawer. My mirror served me well: Every morning before I went to work I would take it out and look at my gaunt face, shave, comb my hair, and apply pomade to keep it in place. That one time each day, when I held the mirror in my hand, I would think of my mother, and almost unconsciously would find myself whispering in my heart: "Good morning, Mother."

In 1952, when I married, my wife brought along with her a brand-new dressing table, and from that time on I looked at my face in that new mirror.

One day, I found my wife examining my piece of broken mirror with a puzzled expression. She must have thought it was a worthless piece of junk that wouldn't even interest a child. When I saw that the mirror was likely to end up in the trash basket, I told my wife about the history attached to it, of the link it formed with my mother and with the brother who had been killed in the war.

She managed to find a small box made of paulownia wood and stored the piece of mirror away in it. It's still safe in its box today.

Even an old fountain pen, if it happened to have belonged to some great writer, is a source of fascination for people, seeming to speak of the secrets behind the masterpieces written with it.

My piece of broken mirror will forever tell the story of those hard-to-describe days of my youth, my mother's prayers, and the sad fate of my eldest brother.

From the essay "A Piece of Mirror," first published in Japanese in November 1968.

Section 31.22: The Starting Point of the Soka Gakkai's Peace Activities—The Declaration Calling for the Abolition of Nuclear Weapons

In The Human Revolution, President Ikeda (who appears in the novel as Shin'ichi Yamamoto) chronicles second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda's 1957 Declaration Calling for the Abolition of Nuclear Weapons. He underscores that the heart of the Soka Gakkai's activities for peace lies in combating devilish functions that threaten the dignity of life and humanity's right to exist.

At the Soka Gakkai's Festival of Youth held at the Mitsuzawa Stadium in Yokohama on September 8, 1957, standing before the microphone with calm assurance, Josei Toda began powerfully: "Today's Festival of Youth has been blessed with clear, sunny skies, free of any trace of yesterday's storm, as if the heavens themselves have responded to your enthusiasm. It was with a profound sense of joy that I watched the competitors among you fully embody the Soka Gakkai spirit in each event, as the rest of you wholeheartedly applauded their efforts.

"Nevertheless, for all our joy today, it is likely that the Soka Gakkai will encounter persecution again in the future. And we ourselves may face all kinds of attacks. Having said that, I would now like to share with you what I hope you will regard as the foremost of my instructions for the future.

"As I have long said, the responsibility for the coming era must be shouldered by the youth. Needless to say, kosen-rufu is our mission, and we must absolutely achieve it. But today I would like to state clearly my feelings and attitude regarding the testing of nuclear weapons, a topic that is currently being debated heatedly throughout society.

"I hope that, as my disciples, you will inherit the declaration I am about to make today and, to the best of your ability, spread its intent throughout the world.

"Although a movement calling for a ban on the testing of atomic or nuclear weapons has arisen around the world, it is my wish to go further, to attack the problem at its root. I want to expose and rip out the claws that lie hidden in the very depths of such weapons. I wish to declare that anyone who ventures to use nuclear weapons, irrespective of their nationality or whether their country is victorious or defeated, should be sentenced to death without exception.

"Why do I say this? Because we, the citizens of the world, have an inviolable right to live. Anyone who jeopardizes that right is a devil incarnate, a fiend, a monster. I propose that humankind applies, in every case, the death penalty to anyone responsible for using nuclear weapons, even if that person is on the winning side."

Toda viewed nuclear weapons as the most devilish invention of the 20th century. The Japanese word for "devil" (ma) is a transliteration of the Sanskrit word mara (devil), which has also been translated variously into Chinese as "murderer," "robber of life," or "destroyer." One might say that the function of devils is to confuse and torment people's minds, take away life, and destroy wisdom.

According to Buddhism, the epitome of such evil is personified as the devil king of the sixth heaven. Another name for this devil is Freely Enjoying Things Conjured by Others, indicating one who desires to control and subjugate people. In this light, the doctrine of nuclear deterrence, which plays upon people's fears to justify the maintenance of nuclear arsenals capable of mass annihilation, is itself a manifest function of the devil king of the sixth heaven.

Note on terminology: The devil king of the sixth heaven, also called devil king or heavenly devil, is the king of devils, who dwells in the highest or the sixth heaven of the world of desire. He is also named Freely Enjoying Things Conjured by Others, the king who makes free use of the fruits of others' efforts for his own pleasure. Served by innumerable minions, he obstructs Buddhist practice and delights in sapping the life force of other beings, the manifestation of the fundamental ignorance inherent in life. The devil king is a personification of the negative tendency to force others to one's will at any cost.

A defining feature of Toda's declaration was that it called upon people to vanquish this devilish nature residing deep within the lives of human beings. Although a popular movement to ban nuclear weapons was gaining strength in Japan as in many other parts of the world, Toda concluded that in order to "rip out the claws" of these weapons—to root out the devil that lurks behind them—it was vital to firmly establish the understanding that they are the product of the devilish nature of life, that they are an absolute evil whose very existence must be rejected.

His stance was that nuclear weapons and their use must be condemned categorically, not from the standpoint of ideology, nationalism, or ethnic identity, but instead from the universal dimension of humanity. This is what makes Toda's declaration so extraordinary. It is also the reason why his declaration would shine ever more brightly through the years.

Although Toda stated in his declaration that those who use nuclear weapons deserve the death penalty without exception, this in no way meant that he was endorsing or advocating the death penalty as a general means of punishment. He had often said that the idea of one person judging another does not exist in Buddhism, which is based on the law of cause and effect. Why, then, did Toda go so far as to use the words "death penalty" in his declaration?

Toda was not advocating that a law be passed requiring the death penalty for those who use nuclear weapons. Rather, his aim, quite simply, was to establish the idea that the use of nuclear weapons, an act that would deny humanity its fundamental right to exist, must be considered an absolute evil. By causing this idea to take root in the hearts and minds of national leaders and people throughout the world, he hoped it would serve as an internal restraint against the use of nuclear weapons. Only the harshest punishment could possibly fit such a crime of ultimate evil, and that would be nothing but the death penalty.

Had Toda simply been satisfied to brand those who used nuclear weapons as devils, fiends, and monsters, his declaration would have remained abstract. He certainly could not have fully conveyed his conviction that the use of nuclear weapons constituted an absolute evil. By daring to propose the death penalty, Toda meant to stamp out any tendency within people's minds to justify the use of these weapons. In a way, he was passing a sentence of death on the devilish impulses within human life itself.

Toda issued his declaration at the height of the Cold War. The vast majority of arguments concerning nuclear weapons made during this time were based upon the ideologies of either the Eastern or Western bloc. Toda's declaration, however, was a radical departure from this way of thinking; it identified nuclear weapons as an evil when viewed from the most fundamental perspective of their impact on human beings themselves.

"Even if a country should conquer the world through the use of nuclear weapons," Toda continued, his voice even more forceful, "the conquerors must be viewed as devils, as evil incarnate. I believe that it is the mission of every member of the youth division in Japan to disseminate this idea throughout the globe.

"I shall end by expressing my eager expectation that you will spread this, the first of my declarations, to the entire world, with the same enthusiasm you have shown in today's sports festival."

Toda closed his speech to resounding applause. Waves of emotion and excitement swept the stadium.

It is deeply significant that Josei Toda made this declaration against nuclear weapons the foremost of his final instructions to the youth. Because Nichiren Buddhism is a religion that exists for people's happiness, the fulfillment of its religious mission to establish the correct teaching in society must be accompanied by the realization of a peaceful land, and this comes about through the fulfillment of each individual practitioner's mission in society.

Toda realized that the devilish nature inherent in life underlies nuclear weapons, and he keenly sensed that the only way to vanquish it was through the power of the Buddha nature. Since human beings created nuclear weapons, they are also capable of eliminating them. Toda was convinced that the existence of the Buddha nature within human beings would open the way to nuclear abolition without fail.

He entrusted the youth with the task of inspiring this conviction in others, urging them to believe in people's Buddha nature, to address that Buddha nature, and to communicate widely the absolute evil of nuclear weapons.

Toda's declaration would become the basis for the Soka Gakkai's activities for peace.

Shin'ichi Yamamoto was overwhelmed with emotion as he listened to Toda's declaration, telling himself that he must, without fail, fulfill his mentor's instructions. From that time on, he began to ponder and search in earnest for a way to spread Toda's conviction throughout the world.

From The Human Revolution, volume 12, "Declaration" chapter.

Section 31.23: Inner Transformation Is the Key

Speaking in Hiroshima, site of the world's first atomic bombing, President Ikeda outlines the essential way to build lasting peace. Based on the Buddhist principle that social turmoil is caused by the impurities in the people's lives, he explains that the Soka Gakkai's activities are aimed at helping individuals purify and transform their lives.

President Toda keenly perceived that nuclear weapons are fundamentally different from conventional weapons in that they pose a threat to the very existence of humanity.

Today, the abolition of nuclear weapons is one of the most important goals of peace movements around the world, which is completely understandable given what we now know. But Mr. Toda accurately discerned the nature of the problem from the earliest days of the nuclear arms race and issued a call for nuclear weapons to be banned, making his insight all the more prescient and astute.

We all have the right to live, the right to attain happiness. That right to live is inviolable. Moreover, no one has the right to rob us of our spiritual freedom.

As long as the people remain weak and subservient to authority, the devilish nature of power will thrive and seek to exploit them. The only way for the people to secure true peace and happiness is to stand up with a strong sense of indignation and fight against such abuses of power, against the devilish impulses inherent in life. My mentor's demand for the abolition of nuclear weapons was a challenge and a rebuke to this hidden devilish nature.

The purpose of our Buddhist practice is to enable people to courageously uphold their principles and advance on the great path to happiness, undeterred by harassment or persecution from those in power; it is to protect human dignity and achieve lasting peace and spiritual freedom for all people. Taking to heart Mr. Toda's instructions, which were backed by his outstanding character, judgment, and conviction, let us spread our great movement for peace and the solidarity of the people throughout the world and into the coming century.

What triggers war and other serious threats to human survival? What are their causes? Nichiren Daishonin cites a Buddhist treatise: "Because anger increases in intensity, strife of arms occurs. Because greed increases in intensity, famine arises. Because foolishness increases in intensity, pestilence breaks out. And because these three calamities occur, earthly desires grow more powerful and false views increasingly flourish" (OTT, 33).

In other words, at the most fundamental level, the social turmoil of war, famine, and pestilence arises from defilements within our lives, from the three poisons of greed, anger, and foolishness. Based on this, we must face the prospect that Japan and the rest of the world will always be prone to such tragedies.

Since becoming the third Soka Gakkai president, two things have constantly remained in my prayers: that there will be no earthquakes and that we will have good harvests. This has been motivated by my genuine desire for the safety and security of our members, the noble children of the Buddha; it is still my earnest prayer.

Enduring peace cannot be achieved solely through political and economic measures. The impurities of the three poisons, which could be considered a sickness inherent within life, must be eliminated. In other words, the sure way to lasting peace is the purification and transformation of individual human lives. That is the teaching of Buddhism and the heart of our Buddhist practice. I am firmly convinced that it is the best prescription for fundamentally healing the spiritual ills of humanity and society.

From a speech at a Hiroshima Prefecture commemorative gongyo meeting, Hiroshima, October 15, 1989.

Section 31.24: Conflict Arises from the Anger in Our Hearts

In a lecture at the East-West Center in Hawaii, President Ikeda examines the root causes of conflict and warfare and argues that Buddhism represents the means to resolve such issues.

The consistent intent of Buddhism is to develop the wisdom that arises from the compassion inherent in the depths of human life. In a letter to one of his disciples, Nichiren—whose teachings we uphold—wrote the following: "Your practice of the Buddhist teachings will not relieve you of the sufferings of birth and death in the least unless you perceive the true nature of your life. If you seek enlightenment outside yourself, then your performing even ten thousand practices and ten thousand good deeds will be in vain. It is like the case of a poor man who spends night and day counting his neighbor's wealth but gains not even half a coin" (WND-1, 3).

A distinctive characteristic of Buddhism, and of Eastern thought in general, is the insistence that intellectual activity always be developed in intimate dialogue with such existential, subjective questions as: "What is the self?" and "What is the best way to live?" The passage I quoted is representative of this style of reasoning.

In recent years, there has been growing concern that competition for water and other natural resources will be an ever more frequent cause of regional conflicts. In this connection, I am reminded of the wisdom that Shakyamuni demonstrated in response to a communal conflict over water in his native state.

When his peripatetic teachings brought Shakyamuni back to Kapilavastu, he found that a drought had depleted the waters of a river running between two ethnic groups in the region, bringing them into conflict. Neither group was prepared to yield, arms had been taken up and bloodshed seemed unavoidable.

Entering between the two factions, Shakyamuni admonished them thus: "Look at those who fight, ready to kill! Fear arises from taking up arms and preparing to strike."

It is precisely because you are armed that you feel fear—this clear and simple reasoning reverberated in the hearts of the parties to the conflict, awakening them to the folly of their actions. All put down their weapons, and friend and enemy sat down together.

When Shakyamuni spoke, he addressed not the rights and wrongs of the immediate conflict but the primal terror of death. He spoke with power and intimacy on overcoming the foremost fear—of our own inevitable death—and living a life of peace and security.

Of course, compared to the fierce complexity of contemporary conflicts, this episode may appear all too simplistic. The present war in the former Yugoslavia, to take but one example, has roots that reach back nearly two thousand years. During that time, the region has seen the schism between the eastern and western Christian churches, the conquests of the Ottoman Turks, and in this century the atrocities of fascism and communism. The tangled animosities of race and religion are indescribably deep and powerful. Each group emphasizes its uniqueness; each group knows and draws upon its history for justification. The result is the deadly stalemate we see today.

It is for just these reasons that I find an urgent meaning in the pattern demonstrated by Shakyamuni's courageous dialogue. Our times demand an embracing wisdom that, rather than dividing, brings into view that which we share and hold in common as human beings.

The teachings of Buddhism offer a treasure trove of peace-oriented wisdom. Nichiren, for example, provides this pointed insight into the relationship between the basic negative tendencies within human life and the most pressing external threats to peace and security: "In a country where the three poisons of greed, anger, and foolishness prevail to such a degree, how can there be peace and stability? Famine occurs as a result of greed, pestilence as a result of foolishness, and warfare as a result of anger" (WND-1, 989).

The wisdom of Buddhism enables us to break the confines of the "lesser self" (Japanese: shoga), the private and isolated self held prisoner to its own desires, passions, and hatreds. It further enables us to contextualize the deep-rooted psychology of collective identity as we expand our lives, with overflowing exuberance, toward the "greater self" (Japanese: taiga), which is coexistent with the universe.

This wisdom is not to be sought in some distant place, but can be found within ourselves, beneath our very feet as it were. It resides in the living microcosm within and wells forth in limitless profusion when we devote ourselves to courageous and compassionate action for the sake of humanity, society, and the future.

Through this kind of bodhisattva practice, we develop the wisdom to sever the shackles of ego, and the spheres of our disparate knowledge will begin to turn with vibrant balance toward a prosperous human future.

From a lecture titled "Peace and Human Security: A Buddhist Perspective for the Twenty-first Century," at the East-West Center, USA, January 26, 1995.

Section 31.25: The Power to Overcome the Threat of Nuclear Weapons

On the initiative of President Ikeda, in response to his mentor's declaration against nuclear weapons, the SGI has sponsored exhibitions around the world promoting nuclear abolition. During his first visit to Costa Rica in 1996, President Ikeda attended the opening of the "Nuclear Arms: Threat to Our World" exhibition. Inspired by the happy voices of children ringing through the venue from the Children's Museum next door, he began his speech on that occasion with impromptu remarks about them.

Girls and boys, emissaries from the future! How wonderful to be joined by these young messengers from the future who will shoulder responsibility for the 21st century!

We can hear the vibrant voices of children playing in the center's Children's Museum next door even here in this hall. The sight and sound of these youngsters, boisterous and full of vitality, are the very image of peace. In them lies the power to overcome the threat of nuclear weapons. In them lies hope.

Children are symbols of thriving life, while nuclear weapons are symbols of death and destruction. How significant that we are able to celebrate the opening of the "Nuclear Arms: Threat to Our World" exhibition here, together with these children.

The Soka Gakkai rejects all forms of violence. This is our eternal creed. During World War II, the first and second presidents of our organization, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi and Josei Toda, spoke out resolutely against Japanese militarism and were imprisoned as a result. President Makiguchi died in prison at the age of 73.

In 1957, only seven months before his own death, President Toda, Mr. Makiguchi's successor, issued the Declaration Calling for the Abolition of Nuclear Weapons. At a time when the nuclear arms race was intensifying, my mentor confronted the threat directly, strongly denouncing nuclear weapons and the prospect of mass death they embody, and declaring that all people of the world have an inviolable right to live.

To make the philosophy of respect for the dignity of life the leading spiritual current of the age was the foremost task that President Toda entrusted to us youth. For this reason, I have dedicated myself to the best of my ability to conducting dialogue and forging bonds of friendship with people around the world in the pursuit of peace.

Our focus must be to develop the inner potential of life that is greater than the power of nuclear weapons, to create a growing solidarity of the people that is more powerful than the impulse for nuclear proliferation. This is an important challenge for education and other awareness-raising activities to empower people. For my part, to the end of my days, I am determined to join with you in the unceasing spiritual struggle to create a world free from violence.

From a speech at the opening of the "Nuclear Arms: Threat to Our World" exhibition at the Costa Rican Center for Science and Culture, Costa Rica, June 28, 1996.

Section 31.27: Choosing Dialogue

President Ikeda has had exchanges and discussions with numerous thinkers and leaders around the world. In this selection, he explains how he has opened a path to world peace and kosen-rufu through sincere dialogue.

May is the month of my dialogue with Arnold J. Toynbee, one of the 20th century's most eminent historians. We spoke for more than 40 hours during two visits I made to London—both in May. The first session took place on May 5, 1972, and the last on May 19, the following year.

On the final day of our dialogue, the 84-year-old Professor Toynbee looked at me, then just 45, with a keen glow in his gentle eyes and voiced the hope that I, with many years ahead of me, would continue to engage the world's leading thinkers in dialogue. Dialogue, he stressed, is the key to humanity's future.

Thirty years have passed since then. Responding to the trust Professor Toynbee placed in me, I have engaged in more than 1,500 dialogue sessions with a wide range of individuals, including Henry Kissinger (American political scientist and former Secretary of State); Bryan Wilson (British sociologist of religion); Aurelio Peccei (cofounder of the global think tank The Club of Rome); Rene Huyghe (French art historian); Anatoli Logunov (Russian physicist and former Moscow State University rector); Josef Derbolav (German authority on pedagogy and Greek philosophy); Chandra Wickramasinghe (Sri Lankan-born British astronomer); Chang Shuhong (Chinese painter known as the custodian of the treasures of Dunhuang); and Hazel Henderson (British-born American futurist).

Conversing freely with such people on the subjects of philosophy, peace, culture, and education and working together with them toward publishing those dialogues are among my greatest memories.

Dialogue is my very life.

It is because each of us is different that dialogue enables us to create fresh value and make new discoveries. Dialogue serves as a mirror, enabling us to see others as well as ourselves. It enables us to break through the shell of our ego and expand our state of life.

Of course, in today's troubled and complex world, dialogue does not automatically lead to understanding. It's not that simple. What is clear, however, is that there can be no understanding without dialogue. To base one's positions on assumptions and preconceptions, without even attempting to meet and talk, needlessly furthers misunderstanding and hostility. What untold suffering this kind of arrogance has inflicted on humanity!

Whether in our personal relationships, our interactions with our neighbors and those around us, or in relations between nations, everything starts from meeting, talking, and getting to know one another. It's a matter of having the courage to meet and talk with others.

To choose dialogue is itself a victory for peace and a triumph of our humanity. That is why I have met, as one human being to another, with all kinds of people, transcending differences of nationality, ethnicity, religion, ideology, age, gender, and social position. I have also carried out interfaith dialogue for the sake of peace with practitioners of various religions, including Christianity, Islam, Hinduism, and Judaism.

My partners in dialogue are incredibly diverse. Among them are leaders of nations, politicians, educators, academics, scientists, economists, peace activists, journalists, writers, poets, artists, and astronauts. They also include people who have been imprisoned for their beliefs.

In each of these encounters, I make it a point to find out what the person has dedicated their life to—their life's purpose or mission, if you like—and to learn from it. Hearing the precious experiences and wisdom of first-rate people can provide an opportunity more valuable than reading mountains of books.

Dialogues are like plays with many acts. There are moments when sparks fly, and moments of sheer delight when beautiful chords of harmony are struck between the participants. Lively dialogue is fulfilling, overflowing with dynamism. That is why I give my all to each encounter.

"Words are seeds." As this proverb from our neighbor South Korea suggests, the seeds sowed through dialogue will, over time, grow and blossom.

When we talk with someone, we aren't speaking solely to the person before us. That person has a family, friends, and many young successors who will carry on their work. A beautiful dialogue in which there is a meeting of hearts is always the starting point for fresh future conversations, the first step to creating an ever-growing network of friendship.

The path from conflict to cooperation lies in dialogue. Dialogue is the way to build a bridge leading to peace. I am determined to devote each day of my life to dialogue, confident that future generations will follow in my footsteps along this great path.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, May 31, 2003.

Section 31.28: The Wisdom for Interfaith Dialogue

Throughout the novel The New Human Revolution, the protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) speaks of the importance of dialogue, including dialogue among religions.

In response to a youth's question about engaging in dialogue with people holding different ideologies and values, Shin'ichi said:

"It's only to be expected that other people are different from you in many ways. However, those differences are what make them who they are. They make our world rich and diverse—like a garden filled with all kinds of beautiful flowers. We need to accept and respect those differences and learn from one another—that should be your starting point. It is crucial to respect everyone as a human being, no matter what their religious affiliation.

"We are all different. Humanity is diverse. But at the same time, we have something in common that transcends those differences: we are all human beings living on this planet Earth. And as human beings, we all seek happiness and long for peace, doing our best to survive while grappling with the existential issues of birth, aging, sickness, and death.

"Based on that shared reality, we should be able to arrive at a shared conviction: Life is precious, and all have the right to live, the right to happiness. That is why war, which brings death and misery, is utterly unacceptable.

"The teaching of Nichiren Buddhism that all living beings are originally and inherently Buddhas is the basis for the conviction that life is precious. This led Mr. Toda, as a Buddhist, to articulate the ideal of a global family and to make his Declaration Calling for the Abolition of Nuclear Weapons."

Shin'ichi's purpose in engaging in dialogue was to affirm this shared human conviction with those he spoke with and forge a consensus for peace. He wished to build a network of people—transcending national, ethnic, and religious differences—dedicated to protecting the dignity of life.

He believed in human goodness. He was certain that by conversing frankly and sincerely, people could come to understand, empathize with, and trust one another.

He added: "People are tied down by all sorts of obligations and commitments, including national interests and positions. The question is, can we go beyond these and take action for the sake of values universal to all human beings? Can we transform suspicion into trust? Dialogue is the work of inspiring and awakening people on the deepest level to make this possible. That is why dialogue requires patience, perseverance, wisdom, and conviction.

"Dialogue also enables us to engage with people of different personalities, philosophies, and beliefs, thereby absorbing new information, wisdom, and ideas. Dialogue is the direct path to elevating ourselves as human beings."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 21, "People's Diplomacy" chapter.

In response to a youth accompanying Shin'ichi on his first trip to Europe, who had expressed concern about propagating Nichiren Buddhism in places with established traditions of Christianity and Islam:

"Everyone who travels overseas seems to worry about this. I heard a similar concern expressed by a young person who accompanied me on my trip to India.

"The main cause of religious wars is people losing sight of the fact that religion should exist for the sake of people and their happiness. They allow that fundamental relationship to be reversed, believing instead that people exist only to further the interests of religion. Nothing is more irreligious than persecuting and killing others because they do not share your religious beliefs.

"Religion must always be for people's well-being, and respect for human life must be its top priority. We must never discriminate against others because of their religion. The essential spirit of Buddhism and the eternal and unchanging principle of the Soka Gakkai is to afford the highest respect to all people, regardless of their religion. The purpose of Buddhism and the true path of humanity is to bring peace and happiness to all.

"I had a good friend who became a Christian. He was a member of the reading group several of us formed right after World War II, when I lived in Morigasaki. We read many works of literature and philosophy together. He encountered a serious problem, which led him to begin practicing Christianity—just before I joined the Soka Gakkai. Later we both moved and lost touch, but I still pray for his happiness to this day. True friendship never fades.

"If we could meet again, I would like to talk about life and share Buddhism with him. Sharing Buddhism starts from friendship. Real dialogue takes place only when you genuinely respect and care about another person."

In response to a member's concern about Nichiren Buddhism being regarded as intolerant:

"Yes, some indeed regard Nichiren Buddhism that way, but the Daishonin's actions and spirit—taking on the people's sufferings as his own and being willing to give his life for their sake—are the embodiment of great compassion, not intolerance. If the Daishonin can be called intolerant in any sense, it is his intolerance of the authorities and religious leaders allied with the government who acted against the people's welfare. On the other hand, his tolerance and acceptance of ordinary citizens were unsurpassed.

"He also affirmed the significance of sutras other than the Lotus Sutra, as evidenced by his frequently quoting them in his writings. Of course, he strongly criticized other Buddhist schools of his day for mistaking partial or provisional teachings for the supreme teaching and essence of Buddhism. We must bear in mind the historical circumstances in which the Daishonin was propagating his teachings."

Note on terminology: Shakubuku is a method of expounding Buddhism by refuting another's attachment to erroneous teachings and thus leading that person to the correct teaching. The term "shakubuku" is used in contrast to "shoju," which means to lead another gradually to the correct teaching in accord with that person's capacity. These two kinds of practice are described in the Shrimala Sutra, T'ien-t'ai's Great Concentration and Insight, and other works. In Nichiren Buddhism, the term "shakubuku" is also often used synonymously with propagating or sharing the Mystic Law.

In response to a question about how to respond to established religions:

"The most important thing is to initiate dialogue. We mustn't use the religious affiliations of others as an excuse not to do so. That would be cowardly.

"Even though their beliefs or views may differ from ours, people of genuine religious faith will care deeply about attaining world peace and the happiness of all humanity. That spirit has much in common with Buddhism. What's important is drawing forth that inner goodness and finding common ground as fellow human beings so that each of us, in our unique capacity, can contribute to peace and happiness.

"It may be true that, from one perspective, we can view human history as a history of religious wars. For that very reason, dialogue among followers of different religions is crucial for building a new era of peace, and it will surely become even more crucial in the future.

"We have to open dialogues between Buddhism and Christianity, Buddhism and Judaism, Buddhism and Islam. Though our beliefs may differ, we all surely share the common desire for peace and human happiness. We are all ultimately human beings, and this offers a key for uniting humanity. With that awareness, instead of engaging in wars with other faiths, religions can engage in a 'competition of goodness.'

"A 'competition of goodness' means competing to find ways to promote peace and happiness for all—or as Mr. Makiguchi called it, 'humanitarian competition' to promote our own and others' happiness. For example, religions could compete to produce the most people of outstanding character contributing to world peace, or to inspire the most hope and courage, among many other possibilities.

"We have to steadily prove the effectiveness of our efforts for peace and the welfare of humanity as we shape and respond to the times. We must perpetuate this trend until the day we put a complete end to conflict and hostility arising from religious differences. I regard this, ultimately, as the Soka Gakkai's great historical mission."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 5, "Joy" chapter.

In response to a youth's concern about the difficulty of dialogue with followers of Islam:

"Why have you decided it will be difficult? How can you know until you try? You mustn't be a prisoner to your assumptions.

"Engaging in dialogue with people of the Islamic faith doesn't mean you have to discuss religious doctrines. Instead, you can start with topics that concern everyone as fellow human beings—for example, culture, education, or how best to work for peace from a humanitarian perspective. People around the world share the same desire for peace and cultural development. As you speak freely and openly about such topics, you'll gradually find yourselves able to discuss more specifically religious themes. In any case, the purpose of dialogue is to find ways to enable all people to become happy and to build a peaceful world.

"In addition, Islam places a high value on writing, an aspect they have in common with the Daishonin's Buddhism. Islam, Judaism, and Christianity all believe in an all-powerful creator. We can identify similarities between this and our view of the Mystic Law as the principle underlying and pervading the universe. We might use that as a starting point for dialogue. I believe that through ongoing dialogue, followers of Islam will discover many things we share in common and attain a better understanding and appreciation of Buddhism.

"Mr. Toda often used to say that if the religious founders Shakyamuni, Jesus, and Muhammad were to gather in a room for a conference, they would quickly understand one another.

"In business, for example, top executives can easily understand one another and reach agreements quickly. That is because they share similar concerns and a sense of responsibility.

"Similarly, the founders of the world's great religions, though living at different times and under differing circumstances, all wished and fought for the people's happiness, despite often terrible personal cost and sacrifices. They were all reformers of their age, wise, courageous, and committed.

"If they could talk to one another, they would no doubt grasp the profundity of Buddhism and quickly arrive at a consensus about what humanity needed in the future and what should be done.

"Unfortunately, such a meeting is not possible, so people today have no choice but to return to the spirit of their religion's founders, who dedicated their lives to people's happiness, and engage in dialogue with one another."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 6, "Treasure Land" chapter.

Section 31.30: The 21st Century Is the Century of Africa

President Ikeda has consistently stated the 21st century will be the "Century of Africa." In this excerpt, he outlines this grand vision and the changes in the mindset of humankind it would encompass.

In October 1960, I was at the United Nations Headquarters in New York, listening to committee and general assembly meetings from the visitors' gallery. That year was called the Year of Africa, 17 nations having declared their independence one after another. The lively faces of the new African UN representatives, lacking any trace of the arrogance and calculation of older, more powerful nations, made a deep impression on me. "It's time to build our countries!" their bright eyes seemed to say, reflecting a joy at finally being free of the chains that had bound them for so long.

At the time, I had just become the third president of the Soka Gakkai and begun my long journey to bring about a new dawn of human rights. I expressed my strong feelings by declaring that the 21st century would be the "Century of Africa," and saying that the world must support the growth of the young saplings of African independence and freedom.

By the Century of Africa, I meant an age in which those who have suffered the most will become the happiest, an age in which those who have endured the greatest humiliation and indignity will walk proud and tall, their heads held high toward the sun.

There will be new leading actors in the drama of human history. Those the world has oppressed the most will be the ones who carry the world into the future. Those who have experienced the extremes of human cruelty have a historic mission to change humanity.

The Century of Africa will also be a century of life where all living things on this planet can live together in peace and harmony. The time has come when the world will learn from the energy, strength, and wisdom of Africa, a continent which, though mercilessly robbed and plundered, never lost the joyful pulse of life.

I am not talking about the patronizing attitude of "helping underdeveloped countries." That is a colonial way of thinking, the condescending idea of "bringing civilization to indigenous people." Rather, we must have the spirit of living together as members of the same human family.

As long as the people of Africa continue to face difficult challenges, it is only natural that we, as fellow human beings and global citizens, should share in their struggles.

From an essay series "Recollections of My Meetings with Leading World Figures—Part 2," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, April 6, 1997.

Section 31.31: Building a Culture of Peace through the Power of Women

In this selection, President Ikeda asserts that the power of women and their steadfast one-to-one efforts to encourage and inspire others serve as a driving force for building a culture of peace.

Throughout the long history of humanity, women have suffered the most whenever society has been wracked by war, violence, oppression, abuse of human rights, disease, and famine.

It has been women, in spite of this, who have persevered in turning society in the direction of good, in the direction of hope, and in the direction of peace. Women hold the key to opening a future filled with hope, as Mahatma Gandhi asserted: "If by strength is meant brute strength, then, indeed, is woman less brute than man. If by strength is meant moral power, then woman is immeasurably man's superior. If non-violence is the law of our being, the future is with women."

Elise Boulding, the renowned peace studies scholar, stresses that cultures of peace are to be found in each individual's process of tenaciously continuing peace-oriented behavior. She attaches particular importance to women's role in this aspect.

Peace is not something to be left to others in distant places. It is something we create day to day in our efforts to cultivate care and consideration for others, forging bonds of friendship and trust in our respective communities through our own actions and example.

As we enhance our respect for the sanctity of life and human dignity through our daily behavior and steady efforts at dialogue, the foundations for a culture of peace will deepen and strengthen, allowing a new global civilization to blossom. With women leading the way, when each and every person is aware and committed, we will be able to prevent society from relapsing into the culture of war, and foster and nurture energy toward the creation of a century of peace.

The SGI has always been a movement committed to empowerment—of the people, by the people, and for the people—through a process we describe as human revolution. The essence of empowerment is to fully unleash the boundless potential inherent in every human being based on the Buddhist understanding that our own happiness is inextricably linked to the happiness of others.

It is our belief that through active engagement with others and the process of mutual support and encouragement, individual peace and happiness will be realized, and the foundations for world peace will be further solidified.

It is my great joy and pride that SGI members—committed to the inconspicuous but steady practice of empowerment by encouraging friends who are suffering and bringing out their courage to live and to hope—have built a people's solidarity through their movement of peace, culture, and education as good citizens of their respective countries and communities.

I would like to affirm once again that the forging of personal relationships based on trust and respect is exactly the culture of peace put into practice. I am convinced that a culture of peace can truly be realized on a global scale and become permanent when peace takes root in the mind of every single person.

From a peace proposal commemorating the 25th SGI Day, January 26, 2000.

Section 31.32: Toward a Sustainable Global Society

Commemorating World Environment Day on June 5, 2012, President Ikeda submitted a proposal to the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development held in Rio de Janeiro (Rio+20). Delving into the important theme of sustainability, he discusses what individuals can do to overcome feelings of powerlessness and transform global society.

Today, there are widespread calls for a paradigm shift from the pursuit of material wealth to sustainability. To achieve this, we must of course review and revise current economic and environmental policies; but this will not be enough. Rather, we must interrogate the very nature of human civilization, from the ways in which our societies are organized to the manner in which we conduct our daily lives.

The loss of human life, the wounding of dignity, the destruction of the familiar nature and ecology of the community—such are the cruel outcomes wrought not only by natural disaster but by armed conflict and environmental degradation. In the case, for example, of climate change, no place can be fully free from risk over the long term; the impacts will be felt by all present inhabitants of Earth and, further, by future generations.

In this sense, shifting the orientation of human civilization toward sustainability requires that the issues involved be considered on an authentically human scale, within the context and experiences of daily life. This is where we must sense the full weight of life's inalienable dignity, and reflect on what is truly important to us and what we must come together to protect.

This is why it is unacceptable to consider the pursuit of sustainability as simply a matter of adjusting policies in order to find a better balance between economic and ecological imperatives. Rather, sustainability must be understood as a challenge and undertaking requiring the commitment of all individuals. At its heart, sustainability is the work of constructing a society that accords highest priority to the dignity of life—the dignity of all members of present and future generations and the biosphere that sustains us.

To many people, sustainability evokes images of various constraints being imposed upon individuals and societies. But such a narrow approach will not give rise to the kind of transformative ripple effects that are required.

Although physical resources are finite, human potential is infinite, as is our capacity to create value. The real significance of sustainability is, in my view, as a dynamic concept in which there is a striving or competition to generate positive value and share it with the world and with the future.

Put simply, efforts by people, communities, and societies to benefit others bring to the fore our most positive and creative aspects. Likewise, the most profound improvement to our present condition comes when we strive for a better future. It is through such repeated efforts, with constant reference to self and other, present and future, that we can protect each other's inalienable dignity and work to build a world in which all people can live in peace and happiness.

The key here is our sense of responsibility to those with whom we share the planet, our sense of responsibility toward the future.

Although many people, confronted with news of horrific events in different parts of the world or of the dire threats to the global ecology, are pained and feel compelled to take action, the cumulative effect of the ceaseless flow of such news can be a deepening sense of powerlessness.

To avoid becoming overwhelmed by these feelings, it is crucial to be grounded—to find a standpoint from which one can sense the impact of one's actions and feel one is making concrete progress in transforming reality. This, in my view, is the role of the local community. A sense of responsibility toward the world or the future is not something that can be developed overnight, in isolation from the realities of daily living. If we cannot establish this within our immediate relationships and environment, we cannot hope to do so relative to the entire planet or the distant future.

The word "responsibility" indicates the ability or capacity to respond. It is through the persistent effort to strengthen and forge our capacity to respond to the evolving realities of the community that a sense of commitment toward all those with whom we share the planet and toward future generations is developed.

From a proposal titled "For a Sustainable Global Society: Learning for Empowerment and Leadership," commemorating World Environment Day, June 5, 2012.

Conclusion: Toward the Future
