Chapter 16: Buddhism Is about Winning

Section 16.1: Both Buddhism and Life Are a Struggle to Be Victorious

"The darker the night, the nearer the dawn." "Morning always follows night." President Ikeda has always cherished these timeless axioms. Having faith that a new day will arrive, he said, is the spirit of Nichiren Buddhism.

All sorts of difficulties and obstacles invariably arise in the course of carrying out our human revolution. President Ikeda repeatedly assures us that by squarely facing and fearlessly challenging them, our inner Buddhahood, the wellspring of victory in life, will shine brightly.

Nichiren Buddhism stresses the importance of winning. Why is this so? What is it that we must win over? What are the requirements for leading a victorious life? This chapter features President Ikeda's guidance on this and other points, related to this important aspect of Buddhist philosophy.

In this selection, citing passages from the writings of Nichiren Daishonin, President Ikeda explains that the fundamental meaning of "Buddhism is about winning" is winning in the struggle between the Buddha nature and devilish functions in our own lives.

The teaching that "Buddhism is about winning" appears throughout the writings of Nichiren Daishonin. It is expressed in many different ways, but perhaps most clearly and succinctly in "The Hero of the World," a letter addressed to Shijo Kingo, one of his leading lay disciples, where the Daishonin writes: "Buddhism primarily concerns itself with victory or defeat" (WND-1, 835). Quoting this passage, Soka Gakkai founding president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi said that the confidence of demonstrating actual proof of victory is the very life of religion.

Note on terminology: Cf. Translated from Japanese. Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, "Kachi sozo" (Value Creation), in Makiguchi Tsunesaburo zenshu (Collected Writings of Tsunesaburo Makiguchi), vol. 10 (Tokyo: Daisanbunmei-sha, 1987), page 47.

Both Buddhism and life are a struggle to be victorious. It is no exaggeration to say that Buddhism was taught to enable all people to win in the most fundamental struggle of life—the struggle between the Buddha nature and devilish functions.

Either we vanquish devilish functions and attain Buddhahood or we are defeated by them and lead lives of delusion. Ultimately, the purpose of our Buddhist practice is to realize victory in this crucial struggle.

This ultimate way of living articulated by Nichiren Buddhism views all aspects of life as a series of struggles that must be fought and won. This is the true reality of existence. For those who earnestly take on this challenge, everything that happens in life, even events in society, become part of their Buddhist practice. In other words, for them, the teaching that "Buddhism is about winning" applies to everything.

The Daishonin writes: "A Buddha is looked up to as the Hero of the World" (WND-1, 835). A "hero of the world" is a person who is courageously engaged in the realities of life and society. A Buddha is one who intrepidly battles devilish functions and, manifesting the life force of the world of Buddhahood, leads a life of right action in human society.

What the Daishonin was trying to teach Shijo Kingo, when he wrote that "Buddhism primarily concerns itself with victory or defeat" is that emulating the Buddha's way of life as a "hero of the world" marks one as a genuine Buddhist practitioner.

If Buddhism is about winning, then how do we win? It is with our hearts, our minds.

The reason the Daishonin emphasizes that "Buddhism is about winning" is to drive home the importance of having the inner strength and fortitude to stand up to every obstacle and difficulty that arises in life. If we are fainthearted and timid, we cannot win over the negative functions in our own lives or in society.

The Daishonin writes: "A coward cannot have any of his prayers answered" (WND-1, 1001). This is the Daishonin's powerful encouragement to his disciples not to allow themselves to be defeated by life's ups and downs, nor to be undone by base negative influences. His teaching that "nothing surpasses the strategy of the Lotus Sutra" expresses the same idea. The Daishonin writes: "Employ the strategy of the Lotus Sutra before any other" (WND-1, 1001).

Faith in the Lotus Sutra is not an intellectual or abstract theory. It must enable us to demonstrate practical wisdom for winning in society, in the real world.

With the heart of a lion king, the Daishonin fought one momentous battle after another, emerging triumphant each time. Such unwavering determination also activates the protective forces of the universe.

In a proud declaration of victory, he says: "It is because the heavenly deities came to my aid that I survived even the Tatsunokuchi Persecution and emerged safely from other great persecutions" (GZ, 843).

Note on terminology: The Tatsunokuchi Persecution refers to the failed attempt, instigated by powerful government figures, to behead the Daishonin under the cover of darkness on the beach at Tatsunokuchi, on the outskirts of Kamakura, on September 12, 1271. The other great persecutions here refer to the Matsubagayatsu Persecution (1260), the Izu Exile (1261), the Komatsubara Persecution (1264), and the Sado Exile (1271-74) that followed in the wake of the Tatsunokuchi Persecution. This passage is from "Oko kikigaki" (The Recorded Lectures), not included in WND, vols. 1 or 2.

Our lives, our daily existence, and society are constantly changing. Every change is either for better or for worse; there is no in-between. That is why it is essential that our faith, our Buddhist practice, enables us to win.

From The World of Nichiren Daishonin's Writings, vol. 3, published in Japanese in March 2005.

Section 16.2: Human Revolution Is a Struggle with Ourselves

Human revolution is a constant struggle with ourselves and with the devilish functions that try to undermine our faith and obstruct our Buddhist practice. The idea that "Buddhism is about winning" is a call to us to win over ourselves—over our limitations and our negative tendencies.

I would like to discuss the assertion that Buddhism is about winning.

My mentor, second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda, who often gave guidance on this subject, said: "Faith is a struggle against deadlock—for the individual and for humanity. It is a struggle between the Buddha nature and devilish functions. That is the meaning of 'Buddhism is about winning.'"

There are bound to be times when we become stalled in our progress. That's when we need to chant and take action with even stronger determination. When we do so, we will definitely cultivate a more expansive state of life and be able to move forward once again. Continually repeating this process is the heart of our Buddhist practice.

Our victory is determined by whether we win or lose in this struggle with ourselves, with stagnation, and with devilish functions.

Those who neglect this fierce, unrelenting struggle with their inner weaknesses are already on the path of decline. They treat life like a game. Such complacency is the very hallmark of defeat.

Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"Buddhism primarily concerns itself with victory or defeat, while secular authority is based on the principle of reward and punishment. For this reason, a Buddha is looked up to as the Hero of the World, while a king is called the one who rules at his will." (WND-1, 835)

Rewards and punishments can be measured by degree and are relative by nature. For example, one can score 10 or 60 out of 100 on an exam, or receive awards of various rankings. In this way, rewards and punishments can be compared with one another as better or worse, because they are relative.

But victory and defeat are absolute. You either win or you lose. There is no middle ground. A Buddha is one who has achieved victory. A "hero of the world"—one of the titles of the Buddha—is an unrivalled champion in the human world, in society.

Various Buddhist scriptures give the Buddha similar names, such as "Victory in Battle," "Victorious Leader," "Triumphant Force," "Superior One," "Superior Banner," "Heroic Subduer of Devilish Forces," and "Ten Power-Wielding Conqueror of Devilish Forces."

Note on terminology: The ten powers are the powers of a Buddha. They are (1) the power of knowing what is true and what is not; (2) the power of knowing karmic causality at work in the lives of all beings throughout past, present, and future; (3) the power of knowing all stages of concentration, emancipation, and meditation; (4) the power of knowing the state of life of all people; (5) the power of judging all people's understanding; (6) the power of discerning the superiority or inferiority of all people's capacity; (7) the power of knowing the effects of all people's actions; (8) the power of remembering past lifetimes; (9) the power of knowing when each person will be born and die, and in what realm that person will be reborn; and (10) the power of eradicating all illusions. These names are found in the Great Majesty Dharani Sutra (Chin. Daweide tuoluoni jing; Jpn. Dai-itoku darani-kyo) and other sutras.

In other words, the Buddha is the leader who triumphs in the struggle against devilish functions. Victory attests to the power of Buddhism, the power of faith.

Referring to his battle with devilish forces, Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"The devil king of the sixth heaven has roused the ten kinds of troops and, in the midst of the sea of the sufferings of birth and death, is at war with the votary [practitioner] of the Lotus Sutra to stop him from taking possession of and to wrest away from him this impure land where both ordinary people and sages dwell.

"It has been twenty or more years now since I found myself in that situation and began the great battle. Not once have I thought of retreat." (WND-2, 465)

Note on terminology: The devil king of the sixth heaven, also called devil king or heavenly devil, is the king of devils, who dwells in the highest or the sixth heaven of the world of desire. He is also named Freely Enjoying Things Conjured by Others, the king who makes free use of the fruits of others' efforts for his own pleasure. Served by innumerable minions, he obstructs Buddhist practice and delights in sapping the life force of other beings, the manifestation of the fundamental darkness inherent in life. The devil king is a personification of the negative tendency to force others to one's will at any cost.

"This impure land where both ordinary people and sages dwell" refers to this saha world, where ordinary people of the six paths (the realms of hell, hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human beings, and heavenly beings) and sages of the four noble worlds (the realms of voice-hearers, cause-awakened ones, bodhisattvas, and Buddhas) dwell together. One of the four kinds of lands described in the doctrine of the T'ien-t'ai school of Buddhism.

The "ten kinds of troops" refers to various kinds of earthly desires or deluded impulses. The Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom lists them as follows:

Greed. (Becoming attached to the five desires and neglecting one's Buddhist practice as a result.) The five desires are the desires that arise from the contact of the five sense organs (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, and body) with their respective objects (color and form, sound, smell, taste, and texture).

Discouragement. (Being depressed and listless.)

Hunger and thirst. (Being assailed by these desires.)

Craving. (Decline resulting from desire or attachment. It includes attachments stemming from love or sexual desire, or addiction to substances such as alcohol or other forms of pleasure-seeking.)

Sleepiness. (This doesn't mean that we are supposed to give up sleep. It refers rather to a lazy and negligent attitude or way of life. It may also include not making any serious attempt to improve oneself and just getting by with the least possible effort.)

Fear. (Succumbing to one's anxieties and being cowardly.)

Doubt and regret. (Devilish functions that try to lead practitioners astray and cause them to doubt or regret the path they are pursuing.)

Anger. (Allowing angry thoughts to obstruct one's practice.)

Fame, fortune, and false glory. (Allowing attachment to material gain and worldly reputation lead one away from the path of attaining Buddhahood.)

Arrogance and contempt for others. (Thinking highly of oneself and scorning others.)

Note on terminology: The Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom is a comprehensive commentary on the Great Perfection of Wisdom Sutra, traditionally attributed to Nagarjuna (c. 150-250). Only the Chinese version translated by Kumarajiva exists today. The work explains the concepts of wisdom and of non-substantiality, and the bodhisattva ideal and the six paramitas, among others. It also incorporates concepts from the Lotus Sutra and other Mahayana sutras, and is considered an extremely important work of Mahayana thought in general.

These, incidentally, are the arrogant tendencies exhibited by individuals who abandoned their faith and attacked the Soka Gakkai. In short, such individuals allowed themselves to be defeated by these ten armies of the devil king, captured by them, and enlisted in their ranks.

What is the weapon for vanquishing these ten armies? It is none other than the "sharp sword" of faith. That's why leaders of kosen-rufu need, first and foremost, to be courageous people of strong faith. Otherwise, no matter how excellent and accomplished they may seem, they will not be victorious in the battle against devilish functions at the fundamental level of life. Strong faith is the measure of a truly strong person.

In this passage, the Daishonin asserts that an intense battle is being fought between the Buddha and devilish forces throughout the universe, which Buddhism describes as the "sea of the sufferings of birth and death."

The entire universe is the stage of a colossal struggle—a struggle between constructive and destructive forces, between the energy toward order and harmony and the turbulent currents leading to disorder and chaos, between the power of compassion that unites and the power of hate that sunders, between life and death, light and darkness, happiness and misery, advance and retreat, rise and fall, freedom and constraint, hope and despair, the energy to nurture life and the impulse to kill. Do we follow the Law that leads to happiness or become enslaved by the workings of the devil king that seek to darken the world with misfortune?

It is vital that we follow the Law that leads to eternal happiness and build a realm of indestructible and everlasting joy. This is our mission as practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism.

From a speech at a young men's division leaders meeting, Tokyo, June 26, 1990.

Section 16.3: Buddhism Originates from Shakyamuni's Triumph Over Inner Devilish Functions

In his novel The New Human Revolution, President Ikeda presents an interpretative imagining of Shakyamuni's life, based on biographical accounts described in various Buddhist writings and handed down in Buddhist tradition. This excerpt depicts Shakyamuni's enlightenment under the bodhi tree as a drama of winning over fundamental ignorance—the working of inner devilish functions—the ultimate struggle in Buddhism.

Shakyamuni continued his meditation under the bodhi tree.

According to Buddhist writings, at this time demons began to tempt him. The devious means they resorted to differ depending on the source, but it is interesting to note that some involved tempting him with words of apparent kindness and concern.

In one account, for example, a demon tried to sway Shakyamuni by whispering to him gently: "Look how gaunt you are, how pale your face is. You're surely on the verge of death. If you keep sitting here like this, it will be a miracle if you survive."

After pointing out the peril he was in and strongly urging him to live, the demon tried to persuade Shakyamuni that if he instead followed the teachings of Brahmanism, he could accumulate great benefit without having to undergo such hardship. Shakyamuni's efforts to attain enlightenment, the demon declared, were meaningless.

The demon's appeals here can be seen as giving voice to the fierce struggle unfolding within Shakyamuni's mind at that moment.

Doubt assailed him, shattering his inner peace and throwing his mind into turmoil. With his body extremely weak and his physical reserves all but depleted, the terror of death must have risen in his heart. Shakyamuni's mental torment was all the greater because, knowing that he had gained nothing from the intense austerities he had previously undertaken, he began to have doubts, thinking that perhaps this present effort to attain enlightenment, too, would prove to be in vain.

He was assaulted simultaneously by attachment to worldly desires, by physical hunger, by craving for sleep, also by fear and doubt.

Demons or devils represent the workings of earthly desires and illusions attempting to unsettle the mind of those who seek the way to true enlightenment. Sometimes devils arise in the form of our attachments to worldly desires, or appear as such physical cravings as hunger or sleepiness. At other times, they torture the mind in the form of anxiety, fear, and doubt.

Whenever people are led astray by such devilish functions, they invariably justify their failing in some way. Furthermore, they convince themselves that their justification is perfectly reasonable and natural.

For example, since in Shakyamuni's day no one had yet attained enlightenment, it may have seemed quite reasonable for him to question whether his meditation under the bodhi tree would achieve his goal.

More often than not, devilish functions cause people to clutch at some seemingly reasonable conclusion that vindicates their weaknesses and emotional needs. Nichiren Daishonin warns of this, citing the words: "The devil will watch over him like a parent" (WND-1, 770).

However, Shakyamuni saw these devilish functions for what they were and summoned a powerful life force, sweeping away all the disruptive thoughts that plagued him. In his heart, he cried out: "Demons! You may defeat a coward, but the brave will triumph. I will fight. I would rather die fighting than live in defeat!"

With this, his mind was restored to a state of tranquility.

The quiet blanket of night enfolded him, as countless stars above glittered with a pure, crystalline brilliance.

After triumphing over the onslaught of devilish forces, Shakyamuni's mind was left fresh and invigorated, his spirit as clear as a cloudless blue sky.

Shakyamuni awakened to the eternal nature of life, to the Law underlying all existence throughout past, present, and future.

At that moment, all fears and doubts that had resided in the depths of his life like a heavy sediment since birth evaporated. He had arrived at last at the deep, immovable roots of his own existence.

He felt the darkness of illusion that shrouded him fall away as the brilliant light of wisdom illuminated his life. He had unlocked within himself a state of being akin to commanding a clear, unhindered view in all directions from atop a lofty mountain peak.

For a time, Shakyamuni simply savored the joy of awakening to the Law—the law of cause and effect governing all life and the universe—but soon he began to grow deeply troubled. He faced a painful new dilemma: Should he preach this Law to others or should he remain silent? Sitting in the shade of the bodhi tree, he agonized for many days over this question.

No one had ever before heard, let alone expounded, this magnificent, unsurpassed Law. A vast gap lay between the brilliant realm within his own being and the real world outside.

People lived in torment, fearing sickness, aging, and death. Consumed by desire, they fought constantly among themselves. All this was due to their ignorance of the Law of life. Yet even if he taught them the Law for their own sake, it was possible that no one would comprehend it.

Shakyamuni felt completely alone. His was the loneliness of the truly enlightened; something known only to those who have gained an understanding of a profound principle or truth that no one else is aware of.

One account depicts demons reappearing at this point to torment Shakyamuni. This episode can again be interpreted as a struggle with the devilish functions in his own life, which were now attempting to dissuade him from teaching the Law to others.

Shakyamuni couldn't stem this upsurge of doubt and hesitation at the thought of forging ahead and spreading the Law. He agonized over what to do. Devilish functions thus continued to plague Shakyamuni even after he had become a Buddha. They vied to attack him through even the smallest breach in his heart.

A Buddha is not a superhuman being. One who has attained this state continues to experience problems, suffering, and pain, and is still subject to illness and to temptation by devilish forces. For that reason, a Buddha is a person of courage, tenacity, and continuous action who struggles ceaselessly against devilish functions.

No matter how lofty a state we may achieve, without persistent efforts to advance and improve, our faith can be destroyed in a moment.

According to a Buddhist text, the deity Brahma appeared before the still indecisive Shakyamuni and entreated him to preach the Law to all people. This episode symbolizes the powerful determination that welled up in Shakyamuni's life to go forward and fulfill his mission.

"I will go forth!" he resolved with finality. "Those who seek to learn will surely listen. Those of little impurity will understand. I shall go out among the people, who are shrouded in delusion and ignorance!"

Once he had made this determination, he felt a surge of new energy flow through him. At this moment, a great lion stood up for the happiness of humanity.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 3, "The Buddha" chapter.

Section 16.4: Winning Over Ourselves Today

Referring to the principle of self-mastery, which the eminent British historian Arnold J. Toynbee stressed in their dialogue together, President Ikeda explains that individual victories over ourselves are the foundation for the human revolution that is the key to transforming society and, ultimately, the history of humankind.

One point that Professor Toynbee stressed in our dialogue Choose Life was the principle of self-mastery—in other words, winning over ourselves. This entails transcending the lesser self that is dominated by egoism and bringing forth the greater self that is oriented to serving the welfare and happiness of others.

It was the keen observation of Professor Toynbee, one of the leading historians of the 20th century, that self-mastery is indispensable for resolving the crises confronting humanity. His conception of self-mastery is what we of the Soka Gakkai call human revolution.

He said: "The struggle to master one's self is the personal action of an individual human being." The inner victory of each individual will lead to great positive development in society, and eventually even change the course of human history itself.

Note on terminology: This quote is from Arnold Toynbee and Daisaku Ikeda, Choose Life: A Dialogue, edited by Richard L. Gage (London: I. B. Tauris and Co., Ltd., 2007), page 324.

What will be the key to winning on the new stage of the 21st century? It is, first of all, winning over ourselves today, changing ourselves for the better today. Let's deeply take this point to heart.

Faith is the source of limitless strength. Religion is the earth from which culture flourishes. The Mystic Law is the wellspring of happiness. Our Buddhist practice gives us the strength to live, to grow, to win, and to surmount any kind of karma.

Nichiren Buddhism doesn't use people as a means to an end. It empowers them to stand up courageously, win over themselves, and share their joy with others. This is the correct way of Buddhist practice followed by the Soka Gakkai.

Scientific progress is important, as of course are business, politics, and education. But there is something more important still, and that is life itself. Inner transformation is the foundation for everything. Both Shakyamuni and Nichiren Daishonin taught this.

The Daishonin revealed the fundamental law that pervades life and universe. He left a way for all people to live with compassion and enjoy happiness and peace.

The supreme law of life and the universe is the Mystic Law, and all of you who uphold it are treasures of the world.

The law of cause and effect in Buddhism is unerring. Please be reassured, therefore, that all who dedicate themselves to the Mystic Law will, in lifetime after lifetime, be outstanding leaders endowed with health, wealth, and attractiveness, who contribute to society, are praised and admired by all, and lead lives of deep fulfillment.

From a speech at a Hong Kong and Macao executive leaders conference, Hong Kong, December 4, 2000.

Section 16.5: Challenge and Response

Referring to Professor Toynbee's theory of history as a process of challenge and response, President Ikeda says that, on both the level of society and the individual, the strength and vitality to keep rising to difficult challenges opens the way to victory.

Since my youth, my motto has been "The greater the resistance waves meet, the stronger they grow."

As a matter of fact, this is very similar to one of Arnold Toynbee's theories of history—that is, the principle of challenge and response.

Professor Toynbee maintained that a civilization would continue to develop as long as people had the energy and vitality to accept various problems and obstacles as challenges and respond to them by growing stronger themselves.

Conversely, when people lost the energy and vitality to respond positively to challenges, a civilization would begin to decline. Professor Toynbee explains this by citing a passage from Goethe's drama Faust. Faust declares to Mephistopheles, the devil personified, who represents the obstacle he must challenge: "If on a bed of sloth I ever lie contented, may I be done for then and there!"

Note on terminology: This quote is from Johann Wolfgang von Goethe, Faust I & II, edited and translated by Stuart Atkins, in Goethe's Collected Works, vol. 2 (Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press, 1994), page 44.

The moment we assume the attitude: "There's no need to continue making effort. I can just take it easy and relax. I don't need to expand my activities or challenge myself any further"—from that instant, our downhill decline begins. This, Professor Toynbee argues, is an unchanging rule of history.

This rule holds true for individuals and for organizations as well. No matter how great the problems or obstacles that beset us, by challenging them and turning them to our advantage, we can become stronger and develop further.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Doesn't a fire burn more briskly when logs are added? . . . Were it not for the flowing rivers, there would be no sea" (WND-1, 33).

The full quote reads: "Doesn't a fire burn more briskly when logs are added? All rivers flow into the sea, but does the sea turn back their waters? The currents of hardship pour into the sea of the Lotus Sutra and rush against its votary. The river is not rejected by the ocean; nor does the votary reject suffering. Were it not for the flowing rivers, there would be no sea. Likewise, without tribulation there would be no votary of the Lotus Sutra" (WND-1, 33; "A Ship to Cross the Sea of Suffering").

Just like these examples, practitioners of the Mystic Law grow stronger and more resilient with each obstacle they encounter. Those who advance with such powerful energy and life force are history's victors, are winners in life. The important thing is for us to become strong and to make our organization strong.

The Daishonin cites the words: "The stronger one's faith, the greater the protection of the [Buddhist] gods" (WND-1, 614). It is an admonition, in one respect, to not depend on others.

Note on terminology: This is from Miao-lo, The Annotations on "Great Concentration and Insight."

This passage attests that we should abandon the indulgent tendency to assume that someone will naturally come to our aid or take our side. It conveys the message that we ourselves need to become stronger, for only then can we activate the protective functions of the universe and win in life.

From a message to a Yamanashi Prefecture women's division leaders meeting, September 30, 1997.

Section 16.6: Stand Up with Faith Based on a Vow

This excerpt from The New Human Revolution depicts an exchange during a discussion meeting with the novel's protagonist, Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda), on his first visit to Brazil in October 1960. Here, he warmly encourages a Japanese migrant struggling to make a living as a farmer.

A man in his early 40s introduced himself stiffly, with the formality of a soldier standing at attention, announcing: "I'm a farmer!"

"Please, relax," said Shin'ichi. "This isn't the army. We're all friends, all a family. Just relax as you would at home."

The members present laughed. A bright smile lit the man's sunburnt face.

He then explained that he had recently started farming vegetables, but his crop had failed, leaving him heavily in debt. He wanted to know what he could do to overcome the situation.

"What was the reason for your crop failure?" Shin'ichi asked.

"I think it might have been partly due to the weather," the man replied.

"Are there other farmers growing the same vegetables as you who produced a successful crop?"

"Yes, but most people's crops failed."

"Was there some problem with the fertilizer you used?"

"I'm not really sure . . . ."

"Was there a problem with the way you tended your crop?"

Silence.

"What about the suitability of the soil for the kind of vegetables you were trying to grow?"

"I don't know . . . ."

The man couldn't reply satisfactorily to any of Shin'ichi's questions.

As a farmer, he was clearly working hard and trying to do the best he could. But so was everyone else. He was unaware of his own complacence in thinking that what he had been doing was enough.

Shin'ichi began to speak in a penetrating tone: "First, it is vital that you thoroughly investigate the cause that led to your crop failure so that you don't make the same mistake again. You might want to talk with farmers who have been successful and take note of what they have to say.

"It is also important that you take sufficient measures to prevent failure. People who are deadly serious about what they are doing are always studying and exerting their ingenuity to solve problems. You won't be successful if you neglect such things.

"You are greatly mistaken if you think that just because you practice this Buddhism your fields will yield abundant crops without any effort on your part. Buddhism is a teaching of unsurpassed reason. Therefore, the strength of your faith must manifest itself in the form of studying, exercising your ingenuity, and exerting twice as much effort as anyone else.

"Earnestly chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the wellspring for the energy to rise to that challenge. And your chanting must also be based on a vow."

"A vow?" asked the man, puzzled.

"By a vow," Shin'ichi continued, "I mean making a personal pledge and praying to fulfill it. Some people just pray that everything they want will fall into their laps without effort on their own part. But a religion that encourages that kind of prayer disempowers people. Prayer in Nichiren Buddhism means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo based on a vow. The essence of this vow is the realization of kosen-rufu.

"In other words, it means chanting resolutely with the determination, 'I will realize kosen-rufu in Brazil. To achieve that, I will show magnificent actual proof of the benefit of Nichiren Buddhism in my work. Please enable me to give play to my fullest potential.' This is what our prayer should be like.

"It is also important that we establish clear and concrete goals for what we hope to achieve each day and then pray and challenge ourselves to achieve each of them. This earnest determination gives rise to wisdom and resourcefulness, thereby leading to success. In short, to win in life we need determination and prayer, effort and ingenuity. It is misguided to dream of getting rich quick, expecting to encounter a rare stroke of luck or some shrewd money-making scheme. That is not faith. It is mere fantasy.

"Our work is the mainstay that supports our lives. Unless we show real evidence of victory in our work, we cannot demonstrate the principle that faith equals daily life. Please rid yourself of any laxness and reapply yourself wholeheartedly to your work with a fresh determination."

"I'll do my best!" said the man, his eyes filled with resolve.

Shin'ichi was well aware of the hardships many of these members striving as migrant farmers were facing. To be successful under such circumstances, they would above all have to battle their own complacency. The enemy they had to face was within.

The greater the adversity, the more important it is to resolve that it is a decisive moment in your life and to keep challenging yourself. It is here that the beneficial power of the Gohonzon becomes apparent. Adversity is therefore an opportunity to prove the power of Buddhism.

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 1, "Pioneers" chapter.

Section 16.7: Winning Means Refusing to Be Defeated

President Ikeda calls on young women's division members to live their lives with an invincible spirit.

"Never be defeated!
Happiness resides
in strong hearts."

Faith equals daily life, and Buddhism is manifested in society. It is inconceivable, therefore, that our Buddhist practice and the teachings of Buddhism would fail to help us win in our daily lives and society or become happy.

Faith, practice, and study are the key. As we put into action the teachings of Nichiren Daishonin, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, let us patiently continue climbing the mountain of victory and happiness day after day, our hearts brimming with hope and optimism. Our life's purpose is to live, strive, and win not only for our own happiness, but also for the happiness of others and the noble cause of good.

We all experience problems, sadness, and suffering. But sufferings arising from earthly desires are the springboard to enlightenment. The more we suffer, the more our life state expands. This is the essential principle of the Mystic Law.

Though we may, for example, be facing a situation as painful as the fires of hell, we can transform it without fail into the happiness of the Land of Tranquil Light.

Note on terminology: The Land of Tranquil Light, also called Land of Eternally Tranquil Light, is the Buddha land, which is free from impermanence and impurity. In many sutras, the actual saha world in which human beings dwell is described as an impure land filled with delusions and sufferings, while the Buddha land is described as a pure land free from these and far removed from this saha world. In contrast, the Lotus Sutra reveals the saha world to be the Buddha land, or the Land of Eternally Tranquil Light, and explains that the nature of a land is determined by the minds of its inhabitants.

The absence of problems and suffering is not happiness. Refusing to be defeated, being able to endure whatever comes our way—that is happiness.

Even if we're facing many pressures, prompting people in our lives to comment on how hard our circumstances are, we need to just calmly and steadily press ahead on the path of our mission. That's the way to make the powerful life force of the Buddha—who is also known as "One Who Can Endure"—well up in our lives.

Those who experience the greatest suffering will come to attain the greatest happiness. Never forget that happiness is a flower that blossoms from the earth of patient endurance.

One of the youthful mottoes of my wife, Kaneko, a member of the first class of the young women's division, was:

"Today again don't be defeated,
today again bring forth courage,
as you make your way
on the path of your vow,
on the path of victory."

Those who don't let anything defeat them are victors. In particular, those who lead undefeated lives, following through on the beliefs that they vowed to uphold in their youth, are the strongest and most admirable of all.

People who can make others happy know genuine happiness.

True victory is becoming a sunlike presence that brightens the lives of everyone around you. In such a person's heart will fly a banner of happiness proudly emblazoned with a spirit of self-reliance and self-esteem.

No banner of victory adorns a life of inaction. No banner of happiness will fly where faith is not accompanied by action.

In this noble and meaningful period of your youth and on throughout your lives, please overcome every obstacle without being defeated, forging ahead on your chosen path with the brilliant light of victory shining in your hearts like the morning sun. That is the most truly human way to live. This is the spirit of Nichiren Buddhism. This is the essence of our Buddhist practice.

"Difficulties will arise, and these are to be looked on as [peace and comfort]" (cf. OTT, 115)—let us always remember these profound words of the Daishonin.

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, November 13, 2004.

Section 16.8: "Where There Is Unseen Virtue, There Will Be Visible Reward"

President Ikeda stresses the importance of accumulating "unseen virtue," observing that the tireless, often unnoticed, efforts of members striving for kosen-rufu together in the unity of "many in body, one in mind" have been the driving force of the Soka Gakkai's remarkable development.

Why has the Soka Gakkai achieved such phenomenal development despite encountering persecution and attack time and time again? In short, it is because our members, united in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind," have been carrying out activities of immense "unseen virtue."

Our membership comprises people from all different backgrounds, professions, and social positions. In that sense, we are "many in body." At the same time, all of us are striving together to realize kosen-rufu, move the world in the direction of peace, and achieve happiness for ourselves and others. We are therefore "one in mind." The Soka Gakkai has been forging ahead based on this unity of "many in body, one in mind."

"Unseen virtue," as the term implies, means good deeds that go unnoticed or unrecognized by others. Our daily Soka Gakkai activities are not glamorous. We engage in one-to-one dialogue, gather in small groups to study and support one another, and hold and attend discussion meetings. There's no spotlight, and our activities are not going to land us in the papers or on television. On the contrary, people may criticize us due to their misunderstanding or malign us out of jealousy. Nevertheless, whether praised or not, we continue to devote ourselves purposefully to our goal of kosen-rufu, steadfastly engaging in acts of unseen virtue. That is why the Soka Gakkai has been victorious.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Where there is unseen virtue, there will be visible reward" (WND-1, 907) and "Unseen virtue brings about visible reward" (WND-1, 940). He assures us that those who perform unseen good deeds will enjoy clear, positive results without fail. In fact, those who unceasingly carry out such actions have already won. There is absolutely no doubt that they will reap wonderful rewards, as will their families and descendants. This is how we should strive to live our lives.

To seek to put up a good image to impress others, amass a quick fortune, or become an overnight success—without making any effort to develop yourself as a person or to contribute to others' happiness—is nothing but empty, self-serving vanity. It is merely chasing phantoms. People with such shallow hearts cannot savor true happiness.

The Daishonin addressed the passages on unseen virtue bringing visible reward I just cited to his loyal disciple Shijo Kingo.

When the mentor, Nichiren Daishonin, suffered relentless persecution like that described in the Lotus Sutra, many of his disciples were shaken with doubt. "We started to practice this faith to become happy, so why are we always being persecuted? Why do we have to suffer like this?" Such misgivings whirled inside them. Some disciples even rebuked their mentor, laying all the blame for their troubles on him. People lost faith because of cowardice. Many deserted him. Others still, forgetting their debt of gratitude, betrayed and attacked him.

At such a time, it was Shijo Kingo and his wife, Nichigen-nyo, who staunchly supported and protected the Daishonin. That is why so many of his writings are addressed to them. Shijo Kingo also accompanied the Daishonin during the Tatsunokuchi Persecution, ready to die at his side. He is a model disciple and an inspiration to us all. Shijo Kingo even hastened to visit the Daishonin in exile on Sado Island. Unlike today, with the conveniences of modern transport, traveling to Sado meant an arduous and perilous journey. It is probably difficult for us to imagine just how hard it was.

Note on terminology: The Tatsunokuchi Persecution refers to the failed attempt, instigated by powerful government figures, to behead the Daishonin under the cover of darkness on the beach at Tatsunokuchi, on the outskirts of Kamakura, on September 12, 1271.

Shijo Kingo himself also became the target of persecution by jealous fellow samurai and the scheming priest Ryokan, who hated the Daishonin. These parties spread false rumors in an attempt to discredit him.

Shijo Kingo's lord, Ema, was a devoted follower of Ryokan.

Not only did he face the threat of having his lands confiscated and being banished to another province, but attempts were also made on his life. Undeterred, Shijo Kingo fought his way bravely through all these bitter trials, "employing the strategy of the Lotus Sutra," just as the Daishonin taught (cf. WND-1, 1001).

Working alongside my mentor, Mr. Toda, I also struggled against the three powerful enemies and the three obstacles and four devils.

Note on terminology: The three powerful enemies are three types of arrogant people who persecute those who propagate the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni Buddha's death, described in the concluding verse section of the "Encouraging Devotion" (13th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The Great Teacher Miao-lo of China summarizes them as arrogant lay people, arrogant priests, and arrogant false sages.

The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are (1) the obstacle of earthly desires, (2) the obstacle of karma, and (3) the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are (1) the hindrance of the five components, (2) the hindrance of earthly desires, (3) the hindrance of death, and (4) the hindrance of the devil king.

And particularly during the most difficult period when his business fell into dire straits, I went through indescribable hardships to support him. I alone stood by his side through everything. Looking back, that was the happiest time of my life. It is because of all those tremendous unseen efforts I made at that time that today's Soka Gakkai exists.

Shijo Kingo, who exerted himself in faith in accord with the Daishonin's instructions, won in the end. He gained trust both from his lord and in society at large, and he eventually received landholdings three times larger than those he had before. The Daishonin rejoiced with all his heart at his disciple's victory, saying: "As I have often mentioned before, it is said that, where there is unseen virtue, there will be visible reward" (WND-1, 907). He also exclaims to the effect: "You encountered terrible persecution as a result of spreading the correct teaching of Buddhism, but, now, how fortunate your circumstances have become!" (cf. WND-1, 940).

It is the principle that those who uphold the correct teaching will always prevail. No matter how much hardship we may undergo for the sake of Buddhism, as long as we persevere with courageous faith, we will definitely be able to surmount everything. What is more, we will attain a vast state of life, beyond anything we could imagine. Nichiren Daishonin's words are true in every respect.

Some people seek nothing but visible reward, such as fame, popularity, or material wealth. But these things are all fleeting. We can accumulate eternal, indestructible good fortune only through acts of unseen virtue. I can say this unequivocally, based on reason and experience.

"Unseen virtue brings about visible reward" means that those who work hardest behind the scenes enjoy the greatest reward. It is a strict, impartial, hope-inspiring principle. This is the teaching of Buddhism, and it is why participating in Soka Gakkai activities is so important.

Although activities for kosen-rufu may involve a lot of hard work, all of you are walking this great path of life exactly as the Daishonin teaches. Life is eternal. I hope you will be confident that the good fortune and benefit you accumulate by exerting yourselves in Soka Gakkai activities will also flow to your families and loved ones.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, April 22, 2004.

Section 16.9: Living the Noblest Life Possible as a Human Being

In Buddhism, winning is not measured by the attainment of worldly fame or honors, but rather by what kind of value we have created and how much we have contributed to the happiness and well-being of others.

"All things are in flux"—I etched this insight of the Greek philosopher Heraclitus in my heart as a youth. All phenomena in the universe, all things without exception, are constantly and endlessly changing. There are all too many examples of people who have risen to the heights of fame and glory only to plummet to abysmal depths at the end of their days.

Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"At times we are born as human beings, becoming rulers of various countries, high ministers, court nobles, or other court officials, and we think ourselves incomparably happy. Thus we content ourselves with such little gains and are delighted with them.

"However, the Buddha has taught that these accomplishments are mere prosperity in a dream, a phantom joy, and that we should simply accept and uphold the Lotus Sutra and quickly become Buddhas." (WND-2, 36)

From the perspective of Buddhism, however puffed up with self-importance people of power, government officials, politicians, or celebrities may be, their status and position amount to nothing but "prosperity in a dream" or "a phantom joy"—fleeting illusions of happiness.

It is a waste to spend one's brief time on earth chasing after illusions, living in pursuit of ephemeral glories or racked by jealousy for those who seem to have attained them.

What, then, is the noblest and most meaningful way to live? The Daishonin indicates that striving to attain Buddhahood is the path to eternal happiness and is itself an unsurpassed way of life. In other words, the answer is to make our lives shine their brightest as entities of the Mystic Law.

Though their lives may not be exciting or glamorous, true victors, genuine champions, are those who strive seriously in their Buddhist practice, exert themselves earnestly for kosen-rufu, and live always together with the imperishable Mystic Law.

Kosen-rufu is a great eternal endeavor. Those who devote themselves to this path will savor boundless happiness and joy throughout eternity, the Daishonin asserts. This is his promise. I therefore wish to declare again that members of the Soka Gakkai are the world's foremost heroes, people of unsurpassed humanity.

In a famous passage, Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"It is rare to be born a human being. The number of those endowed with human life is as small as the amount of earth one can place on a fingernail. Life as a human being is hard to sustain—as hard as it is for the dew to remain on the grass. But it is better to live a single day with honor than to live to 120 and die in disgrace." (WND-1, 851)

A long life is not necessarily a good life. What matters is what we leave behind, what kind of value we create, and how many people we help become happy.

Ultimately, therefore, dedicating ourselves to kosen-rufu is the supreme way to live. It is the greatest possible contribution we can make to society. It brings happiness to ourselves and other people. Buddhism and society, faith and daily life—both are inseparable.

That's why the Daishonin urges us to work for the sake of the Lotus Sutra and kosen-rufu and to make a reputation for ourselves through such efforts. He calls on us to create and leave behind a proud record of personal achievement, free of regrets, knowing that we have done our very best in the limited time available to us in this life.

If we are going to challenge something, we may as well do it with a bright and positive attitude. It's no fun otherwise. When we make efforts on our own initiative and challenge our goals cheerfully, we will be filled with joy and an upsurge of energy.

Let's challenge ourselves joyfully. Those who advance with joy accumulate good fortune. Buddhism is about winning; it is an ongoing struggle. Those who strive joyfully will win in the end. Those who base themselves on faith in the Mystic Law and on chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo are sure to be ultimate victors.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, March 24, 1993.

Section 16.10: Leading a Winning Life Based on the Mystic Law

President Ikeda explains that those who base themselves on the Mystic Law can create positive value from their successes as well as their setbacks and failures, all of which will help them surmount the next challenge that awaits and savor ultimate victory in life.

The fundamental aim of Nichiren Buddhism is the development of kosen-rufu. Time and time again in his writings, Nichiren Daishonin stresses the importance of kosen-rufu, or "widespread propagation" of the Mystic Law. As such, the true measure of the success of our movement is the degree to which we have actually been able to expand the realm of kosen-rufu. Our ultimate goal is to build a peaceful and happy society based on Buddhist humanism and the philosophy of respect for the dignity of life. In that regard, even just continuing to advance a step or two at a time is fine.

Of course, life is a succession of struggles, and we experience victories and defeats on various levels along the way. No matter how strong or capable we are, we can't always win. That's the way it is in life's struggles.

My mentor, Josei Toda, composed the following poem as one of his final messages to us:

"Winning and losing
are both
part of life,
but I pray to the Buddha
for final victory."

Life is long, and there may be times when things don't work out as we hope. But we embrace the Mystic Law, the incomparable strategy of the Lotus Sutra (cf. WND-1, 1001). If we uphold the Lotus Sutra and base ourselves on faith throughout our lives, then no matter what successes or setbacks we may experience along the way, we are certain to win in the end. That is the great teaching of Buddhism. Therefore, we have nothing to worry about.

Win or lose, the most important thing is whether we can make that particular result a cause for future victory. Every moment is a fresh start.

Let's continue advancing together with optimism and confidence toward our next triumph, united solidly in purpose with our fellow members. This epitomizes the practice of the Buddhism of true cause—a teaching of moving ever forward from the present moment.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, September 14, 2005.

Section 16.11: "Summon Up the Courage of a Lion King"

In "On Persecutions Befalling the Sage," Nichiren Daishonin declares: "Each of you should summon up the courage of a lion king and never succumb to threats from anyone" (WND-1, 997). Based on this famous passage, President Ikeda discusses the essence of practicing Nichiren Buddhism.

Nichiren Daishonin urges his disciples: "Each of you should summon up the courage of a lion king" (WND-1, 997).

This is the essence of Nichiren Buddhism. As the passage indicates when it says "each of you," we each possess within the courage of a lion king. The basis for summoning forth that courage is faith grounded in a spirit of oneness with our mentor.

The courage of a lion king is the spirit of the mentor who has fearlessly opened the way for kosen-rufu. When we share that spirit as our own, we cannot fail to bring forth the courage of a lion king in our lives.

When I was working my hardest to support Mr. Toda, I made a deep determination. To protect my mentor, a lion king, I resolved as his disciple to summon up the courage of a lion king and overcome every obstacle.

When we strive with the same spirit as our mentor, we will never be deadlocked. Asking ourselves what our mentor would do, mustering all our wisdom and strength to respond to our mentor's hopes—that spirit awakens the state of a lion king within us. It gives rise to the courage to triumph over every difficulty and challenge.

Mr. Toda often said that those who continue to strive courageously for kosen-rufu, the wish of Nichiren Daishonin, are bodhisattvas and Buddhas.

The spirit of a lion king is one of unwavering commitment. It is an invincible spirit, the Soka Gakkai spirit. It is by struggling with and winning over difficulties that we attain Buddhahood. That's why we have to summon the courage of a lion king. Faith is another name for the courage to always move forward.

From the early days of the Soka Gakkai, our members fought on tirelessly, refusing to allow unfounded criticism and abuse to defeat them. They did so in accord with the Daishonin's admonition to "never succumb to threats from anyone" (WND-1, 997). They gritted their teeth and did not retreat a single step. Those who advance, even if just a step, or just a millimeter, are victors. Not giving in to defeat is the way to accumulate imperishable treasures of the heart and, in so doing, to accomplish one's human revolution and transform one's karma. In the realm of faith, those who sincerely persevere in their Buddhist practice are certain to be crowned with brilliant victory in the end.

Continuing, the Daishonin writes: "The lion king fears no other beast, nor do its cubs. Slanderers are like barking foxes, but Nichiren's followers are like roaring lions" (WND-1, 997). His writings contain numerous references to the lion king. He compares his enlightened state of life to that of a lion king to make it more easily understandable to his disciples. The Buddhist scriptures employ the lion king as a symbol for the Buddha.

The Daishonin also likens the Lotus Sutra, the king of sutras, to a lion king. Those who embrace this sutra will attain the life state of a lion king, fearless and confident, as he indicates with his assurance that one "will move about without fear like the lion king" (WND-1, 412). Hence, he writes, when we chant the lion's roar of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, "What sickness can therefore be an obstacle?" (WND-1, 412).

In "On Persecutions Befalling the Sage," the Daishonin stresses that, just like the lion king, its cubs must not fear any other beasts (cf. WND-1, 997). It is the "barking foxes" that run away in fear when they hear the lion's roar.

The key to battling obstacles or negative forces exists within our own hearts. Thus, no matter how formidable an obstacle or devilish function may be, there is no reason to fear it. Instead, what we should fear is giving in to the tendency in our hearts to let it sway or intimidate us (cf. WND-1, 501).

Note on terminology: In "Letter to the Brothers," the Daishonin cites a passage from T'ien-t'ai's Great Concentration and Insight that states: "As practice progresses and understanding grows, the three obstacles and four devils emerge in confusing form, vying with one another to interfere. . . . One should neither be influenced nor frightened by them. If one falls under their influence one will be led into the paths of evil. If one is frightened by them, one will be prevented from practicing the correct teaching" (WND-1, 501).

The key to victory is to remain undefeated in spirit. "It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 1000). Victors in spirit are victors in life.

In this passage, the Daishonin refers to "Nichiren's followers" (WND-1, 997). In the 27 years since establishing his teaching [in 1253], he had fought against and triumphed over all kinds of powerful enemies and harsh persecutions. "Nichiren's followers" implies those who have forged a profound mentor-disciple bond with him.

I read his use of "Nichiren's followers" as powerful encouragement that proclaims: "You are all my disciples! As such, if you strive in the same way I have, you will definitely win!"

Disciples who embrace the great aim of kosen-rufu and follow the example of a great teacher full of compassion, courage, and wisdom will never be defeated. The lion king is always victorious. The lion cubs must resolve to become lion kings, too. Now is the time for them to do so. The Daishonin's disciples should all encourage one another that the time to stand up resolutely as lion kings has arrived.

From a lecture series "Buddhism of the Sun: Illuminating the World," published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, November 2015.
