Chapter 10: Joy in Both Life and Death

Section 10.1: Consolidating the State of Buddhahood in This Lifetime

In his 1993 lecture at Harvard University, "Mahayana Buddhism and Twenty-First-Century Civilization," President Ikeda, based on the teachings of Nichiren Buddhism, presents the profound Buddhist view of finding joy in both life and death.

What is the purpose of life? What is a life of true value? What is death? What happens after death? Nichiren states, "Therefore I should first of all learn about death, and then about other things" (WND-2, 759). By confronting the issue of death head-on, we can build a truly happy life.

This chapter features President Ikeda's guidance on how to face and overcome the sufferings of birth and death.

Why do we practice Nichiren Buddhism? So that we may live the most wonderful lives. So that we may serenely overcome the four sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death that are an inescapable part of the human condition.

The first of the four sufferings is birth. Having been born, we must live out our lives. It is important that we strive to live on tenaciously to the very end, no matter what happens.

Our Buddhist practice based on the Mystic Law gives us the powerful life force to live each day with strength and confidence, surmounting all kinds of problems and hardships. Why are we born? A life lived without meaning, without knowing the answer to that question, is shallow and empty. To just live, eat, and die without any real sense of purpose surely constitutes a base, animal-like existence.

On the other hand, to do, create, or contribute something that benefits others, society, and also ourselves, and to dedicate ourselves as long as we live to that challenge—that is a life of true satisfaction, a life of value, a life of the loftiest humanity. Our Buddhist practice based on the Mystic Law, moreover, is the driving force that enables us to create the greatest possible value for ourselves and for others.

Aging is the second of the four sufferings. Life passes by in a flash. In the blink of an eye, we are old. Our physical strength wanes, and things start to go wrong with our bodies. Our practice of Nichiren Buddhism enables us to make our old age a time of great richness, like a golden autumn harvest, instead of a time of sad and lonely decline. The setting sun bathes the earth and sky in a magnificent glow. We practice Nichiren Buddhism so we can enjoy just such a vibrant, glowing old age, without regrets.

The third of the four sufferings is sickness. We are mortal beings. All of us experience illness in one form or another. The power of the Mystic Law enables us to bring forth the strength to overcome the suffering of sickness. Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is like the roar of a lion. What sickness can therefore be an obstacle?" (WND-1, 412).

Though we may fall ill or experience some other trying situation, if we are devoting ourselves to the realization of kosen-rufu, Nichiren Daishonin will protect us, as will all Buddhas and bodhisattvas and the heavenly deities—the protective functions of the universe.

The Daishonin promises: "A woman who takes this efficacious medicine [of Myoho-renge-kyo] will be surrounded and protected by these four great bodhisattvas [the leaders of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth, an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law] at all times. When she rises to her feet, so too will the bodhisattvas, and when she walks along the road, they will also do the same. She and they will be as inseparable as a body and its shadow, as fish and water, as a voice and its echo, or as the moon and its light." (WND-1, 415)

As this passage indicates, those who embrace faith in the Mystic Law will definitely be protected—not only in this lifetime but throughout eternity.

Death is the last of the four sufferings. Death is uncompromising; we must all face it one day. When that moment comes, those who travel on the path of the Mystic Law will make their way serenely to the pure land of Eagle Peak aboard the "great white ox cart" described in the Lotus Sutra. The great white ox cart is a carriage adorned with jewels and drawn by a great white ox. It appears in the parable of the three carts and the burning house in the "Simile and Parable" (3rd) chapter of the Lotus Sutra, where it represents the one Buddha vehicle, or the supreme vehicle of Buddhahood. Their lives will merge with the world of Buddhahood of the universe. The Lotus Sutra describes the "great white ox cart" as being immense in every dimension and adorned with gold, silver, and countless precious gems.

If we attain the state of Buddhahood in this existence, that state will forever pervade our lives. In lifetime after lifetime, we will enjoy lives blessed with health, wealth, intellect, favorable circumstances, and good fortune. We will possess our own unique mission, and be born in a form suitable to fulfilling that mission. This state of life is everlasting; it can never be destroyed.

It is precisely so that you may enjoy such eternal happiness that I continually urge you to apply yourself to your Buddhist practice and firmly consolidate the state of Buddhahood in your life in this existence. This is not just a matter of personal sentiment. It is the teaching of Nichiren Daishonin.

It's crucial, therefore, that we do not move off the path leading to Buddhahood, but that we keep pressing ever forward with patience and persistence along the path of kosen-rufu and Buddhist practice.

There may well be times when we feel disinclined to do something, or when we would like to take a break. This is only natural, since we are ordinary beings. But what matters is that we stay on course, that we continue forging ahead patiently on the path to Buddhahood while encouraging one another along the way.

If a plane flies off course or a car veers carelessly off the road, it can easily have an accident or fail to reach its destination. Similarly, if our lives go off course, we, too, can crash, plunging into misfortune and misery. Though it may not be visible to the eye, there is a path or course in life. A path leading to absolute happiness exists without a doubt—and that is the path of the Mystic Law.

If we continue on this path without abandoning our Buddhist practice, we will definitely come to savor a life of complete fulfillment, both materially and spiritually.

From a speech at a gongyo meeting at New York Culture Center, U.S.A., June 15, 1996.

Note on terminology: In a portion of the speech not included in this excerpt, President Ikeda cited the passage from Nichiren Daishonin's writing "On the Large Carriages Drawn by White Oxen": "These large carriages drawn by white oxen [i.e., the great white ox carts] are able to fly at will through the sky of the essential nature of phenomena [Dharma nature, or enlightenment]. Those persons who come after me will ride in these carriages and journey to [the pure land of] Eagle Peak. And I, Nichiren, riding in the same kind of carriage, will come out to greet them" (WND-2, 976).

Section 10.3: The Buddhist View of Life That Transcends the Suffering of Death

While confronting the fundamental suffering of death, Shakyamuni established a view of eternal life. Through a consideration of Shakyamuni's enlightenment, President Ikeda explores the essence of the Buddhist conception of life and death.

All living things have an instinctual fear of death. Human beings in particular are afflicted by an indescribable terror when they contemplate what sort of world may await them after departing from the realm of the living.

With tremendous courage, Shakyamuni overcame this primal human instinct to fear death, to refuse to countenance or contemplate its reality, and accepted the suffering that is the true nature of human existence. Then, based on that courageous stance, he deeply pondered the essence of life and death.

Buddhism teaches the eternity of life, but not as a simplistic response to people's cherished hopes for immortality. The Buddhist teachings of the impermanence of all phenomena and the four noble truths, which clarify the causes and the resolution of human suffering, directly expose the reality of the suffering inherent in life, a reality that people try to avoid.

Note on terminology: The four noble truths are a fundamental doctrine of Buddhism clarifying the cause of suffering and the way of emancipation. Shakyamuni is said to have expounded the four noble truths at Deer Park in Varanasi, India, during his first sermon after attaining enlightenment. They are: (1) all existence is suffering; (2) suffering is caused by selfish craving; (3) the eradication of selfish craving brings about the cessation of suffering and enables one to attain nirvana; and (4) there is a path by which this eradication can be achieved, namely, the discipline of the eightfold path. The eightfold path consists of right views, right thinking, right speech, right action, right way of life, right endeavor, right mindfulness, and right meditation.

Shakyamuni did not seek to whitewash the reality of existence by offering some consoling myth or fiction; he looked at it directly, with cool objectivity. All things that are born will die. He affirmed this as the underlying truth of existence.

Why do we die? Are life and death completely separate from one another? Or are they closely interrelated? Is there a continuity underlying life itself? Reflecting on his own life, Shakyamuni sought the answers to those questions with courage, tenacity, and objectivity. And the truth to which he became enlightened is that life is eternal.

Human existence includes both life and death. It flows on eternally, with a powerful force, repeating a cycle of alternating manifest and latent phases. Shakyamuni saw this in the flow of his own life.

His is not a philosophy of the immortality of the soul, arising from a dogged attachment to life, but a solid affirmation of the eternity of life based on a recognition of the law of cause and effect unfolding within each individual life.

The significance of death in such a view of life's eternity is that death exists for the sake of life. It is akin to sleep, which provides us with the rest we need to awaken once again. Death is an "expedient means" for life. Death's purpose is to make life shine brighter, while life is the innate activity of existence. Life and death are not in opposition to one another; death exists for the sake of life. This is the meaning of the Lotus Sutra teaching of "entering nirvana as an expedient means" (cf. LSOC16, 271). In the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni declares that his life as a Buddha is eternal, but as a means to help living beings arouse a seeking spirit, he appears to enter nirvana, or extinction.

The essential message of Buddhism is not pessimistic or negative; nor is it unfounded optimism. Buddhism looks directly at the suffering of life and offers a philosophy for living with joy by actively engaging with reality rather than trying to escape from it. There is no true joy to be had in fleeing from suffering. An indestructible, everlasting, and inexhaustible joy is only achieved by accurately seeing the true reality of the suffering we would like to escape and courageously rising to its challenge and overcoming it.

From Seimei o kataru, or Dialogue on Life, vol. 3, published in Japanese in March 1974.

Section 10.4: The Oneness of Life and Death

Based on the teachings of the Lotus Sutra, President Ikeda elucidates the eternity of life, that birth and death continue in an endless cycle of latent and active states.

Birth and death are different aspects of life. In other words, life manifests solely through the cycle of birth and death.

In the eyes of ordinary mortals, life begins with birth and ends with death. But the insight of Buddhism sees through this limitation and perceives the essence of life as a whole, manifesting actively as birth or existence and persisting in dormant form as death. From that perspective, how does Buddhism view these two aspects of birth and death?

The "Life Span" chapter of the Lotus Sutra speaks of "ebbing" and "flowing" (cf. LSOC16, 267). "Ebbing" refers to death and "flowing" to life. Based on the standpoint of the eternity of life, the "Life Span" chapter states that life itself does not disappear and emerge, does not undergo birth or death. In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin reveals an even more profound view of life as the "originally inherent nature of birth and death" (OTT, 127). According to this principle, living is the state in which our life is actively manifested, and death is the state when it returns to a latent or potential state. These phases of birth and death continue eternally. That is the true nature of life itself.

Note on terminology: In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin says: "We may also say that nonexistence (mu) and existence (u), birth and death, ebbing and flowing, existing in this world and entering extinction, are all, every one of them, actions of the eternally abiding inherent nature" (OTT, 127–28).

The supreme teaching of Buddhism that views living as an active state and death as a latent state offers a profound and magnificent view of the eternity of life.

In addition, it teaches the oneness of life and death. Life is activated by a wondrous, underlying power. When life in its latent state comes into contact with the right causes and conditions, it becomes manifest and takes shape as a dynamic living being with a rich individuality. Eventually, that life quietly ebbs and moves toward death. But as it shifts into its potential, dormant phase, it stores a new energy, awaiting the next new phase of life.

Life is an explosion and burning of the stored-up energy that had been in a resting state. Eventually that life brings its story to a close and it drifts back into death. It merges with the universe, is recharged by the power of the life of the universe as a whole, and awaits its next emergence into active life.

This is the nature of life and death inherent in all things, and Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the foundation of this intrinsic rhythm of the universe.

From a lecture on Nichiren Daishonin's writing "The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, April 1977.

Section 10.5: Savoring Joy in Both Life and Death

Referring to his observations on the Buddhist view of life and death presented in "Mahayana Buddhism and Twenty-First-Century Civilization," the lecture he delivered at Harvard University in 1993, President Ikeda asserts that those who dedicate their lives to kosen-rufu and build a state of absolute happiness can advance along a path in which there is joy in both life and death. Excerpts from the lecture also appear at the end of this section.

I have been invited to speak at Harvard University, one of the most prestigious institutions of higher learning in the United States, on two occasions (in 1991 and 1993). In my second speech, I addressed the Buddhist view of life and death, in which we can experience joy in both life and death.

Dr. Harvey Cox, then chair of the Harvard Divinity School's Department of Applied Theology, commented that I had presented my audience with a completely new perspective on death.

Death is not the end of everything. Birth and death are both aspects of the eternity of life. The cycle of birth and death grounded in the Mystic Law is a drama unfolding on a great stage of life existing eternally. By striving for kosen-rufu, we can firmly establish a state of absolute happiness in this existence. People who achieve that can advance along the path of joy in both life and death.

This planet Earth is not the only place one can be born. In this vast universe, many scientists believe, there are innumerable planets where life exists. The Lotus Sutra presents a grand and expansive view of the universe, teaching that the number of realms in which living beings reside is infinite—a view that is widely supported by contemporary astronomy. There may be some planets where all the inhabitants are good and virtuous, and others, like our Earth, where there are also many who are selfish and devious. There may also be planets where everyone lives happily, in fine health, enjoying long lives, and listening to beautiful music from morning to night.

When the functions of our hearts and minds and the functions of the universe are in synch, we can be born wherever we wish and in any form we desire. The Lotus Sutra speaks of "freely choosing where one will be born" (cf. LSOC10, 202). This is the essence of Buddhism.

President Toda often likened death to sleep. Just as we awake refreshed and energized after a good night's sleep, those who pass away having chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo throughout their lives will, after a period of rest, be reborn to once again join the ranks of those striving for kosen-rufu, he used to say.

Nichiren Daishonin repeatedly offers guidance about the moment of death in his writings. For example:

"How can we possibly hold back our tears at the inexpressible joy of knowing that [at the moment of death] not just one or two, not just one hundred or two hundred, but as many as a thousand Buddhas will come to greet us with open arms!" (WND-1, 216–17)

"Without fail, I will be with you at the time of your death and guide you from this life to the next." (WND-1, 965)

"When he was alive, he was a Buddha in life, and now he is a Buddha in death. He is a Buddha in both life and death. This is what is meant by that most important doctrine called attaining Buddhahood in one's present form." (WND-1, 456)

A belief in the eternity of life has been shared by many of the world's great writers and thinkers. Their view of life has much in common with the perspective of Buddhism.

Leo Tolstoy was one such individual. In 1907, when he was 79 years old, a few years before he passed away, Tolstoy wrote: "Living is joyous, and death, too, is joyous." These words express the unshakable state of mind that Tolstoy had reached after a life of great vicissitudes.

The eminent British historian Arnold J. Toynbee was also deeply impressed by the Buddhist view of life.

We have faith in, are practicing, and are sharing the supreme teaching of Buddhism, eagerly sought by the world's leading thinkers. There is no life more wonderful.

From a speech at a joint training session, Nagano, August 19, 2005.

Supplementary Reading from the Harvard Lecture:

It was the Greek philosopher Heraclitus who declared that all things are in a state of flux and that change is the essential nature of reality. Indeed, everything, whether it lies in the realm of natural phenomena or of human affairs, changes continuously. Nothing maintains exactly the same state for even the briefest instant; the most solid-seeming rocks and minerals are subject to the erosive effects of time. But during this century of war and revolution, normal change and flux seem to have been accelerated and magnified. We have seen the most extraordinary panorama of social transformations.

The Buddhist term for the ephemeral aspect of reality is "the transience of all phenomena" (shogyo mujo in Japanese). In the Buddhist cosmology, this concept is described as the repeated cycles of formation, continuance, decline, and disintegration through which all systems must pass.

During our lives as human beings, we experience transience as the four sufferings: the suffering of birth (and of day-to-day existence), that of illness, of aging, and finally, of death. No human being is exempt from these sources of pain. It was, in fact, human distress, in particular the problem of death, that spawned the formation of religious and philosophical systems.

It is said that Shakyamuni was inspired to seek the truth by his accidental encounters with many sorrows at the gates of the palace in which he was raised. Plato stated that true philosophers are always engaged in the practice of dying, while Nichiren, founder of the school of Buddhism followed by members of the SGI, admonishes us to "first of all learn about death, and then about other things" (WND-2, 759).

Death weighs heavily on the human heart as an inescapable reminder of the finite nature of our existence. However seemingly limitless the wealth or power we might attain, the reality of our eventual demise cannot be avoided. From ancient times, humanity has sought to conquer the fear and apprehension surrounding death by finding ways to partake of the eternal. Through this quest, people have learned to overcome control by instinctual modes of survival and have developed the characteristics that we recognize as uniquely human. In that perspective, we can see why the history of religion coincides with the history of humankind.

Modern civilization has attempted to ignore death. We have diverted our gaze from this most fundamental of concerns as we try to drive death into the shadows. For many people living today, death is the mere absence of life; it is blankness; it is the void. Life is identified with all that is good: with being, rationality, and light. In contrast, death is perceived as evil, as nothingness, and as the dark and irrational. Only the negative perception of death prevails.

We cannot, however, ignore death, and the attempt to do so has exacted a heavy price. The horrific and ironic climax of modern civilization has been in our time what Zbigniew Brzezinski has called the "century of megadeath." Today, a wide range of issues is now forcing a reexamination and reevaluation of the significance of death. They include questions about brain death and death with dignity, the function of hospices, alternative funerary styles and rites, and research into death and dying by writers such as Elisabeth Kübler-Ross.

We finally seem to be ready to recognize the fundamental error in our view of life and death. We are beginning to understand that death is more than the absence of life; that death, together with active life, is necessary for the formation of a larger, more essential, whole. This greater whole reflects the deeper continuity of life and death that we experience as individuals and express as culture. A central challenge for the coming century will be to establish a culture based on an understanding of the relationship of life and death and of life's essential eternity. Such an attitude does not disown death, but directly confronts and correctly positions it within the larger context of life.

Buddhism speaks of an intrinsic nature (hossho in Japanese, sometimes translated as "Dharma nature") existing within the depths of phenomenal reality. This nature depends upon and responds to environmental conditions, and it alternates between states of emergence and latency. All phenomena, including life and death, can be seen as elements within the cycle of emergence and latency, or manifestation and withdrawal.

Cycles of life and death can be likened to the alternating periods of sleep and wakefulness. Just as sleep prepares us for the next day's activity, death can be seen as a state in which we rest and replenish ourselves for new life. In this light, death should be acknowledged, along with life, as a blessing to be appreciated. The Lotus Sutra, the core of Mahayana Buddhism, states that the purpose of existence, the eternal cycles of life and death, is for living beings to "enjoy themselves at ease" (LSOC16, 272). It further teaches that sustained faith and practice enable us to know a deep and abiding joy in death as well as in life, to equally "enjoy ourselves at ease" in both. Nichiren describes the attainment of this state as the "greatest of all joys" (OTT, 212).

If the tragedies of this century of war and revolution have taught us anything, it is the folly of believing that reform of external factors, such as social systems, is the linchpin to achieving happiness. I am convinced that in the coming century, the greatest emphasis must be placed on fostering inwardly-directed change. In addition, our efforts must be inspired by a new understanding of life and death.

From a lecture at Harvard University, "Mahayana Buddhism and Twenty-First-Century Civilization," U.S.A., September 24, 1993.

Section 10.6: Advancing on the Path of Buddhahood in Both Life and Death

The aim of Buddhism is to establish a state of indestructible happiness enduring throughout past, present, and future, making it crucial that we strengthen our inner life state of Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Buddhism began from the quest to find a solution to the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death. Life and death are the most important questions of existence, yet many people turn away from looking at them.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "The Nirvana Sutra states, 'Human life runs its course more swiftly than a mountain stream; the person here today will not likely be here tomorrow.' The Maya Sutra reads, 'Imagine, for instance, a flock of sheep being driven by a chandala to the slaughterhouse. Human life is exactly the same; step by step one approaches the place of death.' The Lotus Sutra states, 'There is no safety in the threefold world; it is like a burning house, replete with a multitude of sufferings, truly to be feared.' [LSOC3, 105]"

Note on terminology: Chandala is a class of untouchables, below the lowest of the four castes in the ancient Indian caste system. People in this class handled corpses, butchered animals, and carried out other tasks associated with death or the killing of living things. Nichiren declared himself to be a member of the chandala class because he was born to a fisherman's family. The threefold world is the world of unenlightened beings who transmigrate within the six paths (from hell through the realm of heavenly beings). It consists of, in ascending order, the world of desire, the world of form, and the world of formlessness. In a general sense, it refers to the saha world in which we dwell.

The Daishonin continues: "In these passages from the sutras, our compassionate father, the World-Honored One of Great Enlightenment [Shakyamuni Buddha], admonishes us, the ordinary people of the latter age; it is his warning to us, his ignorant children. Nevertheless, the people do not awaken for even one instant; nor do they conceive a desire to attain the way for even a single moment. In order to decorate their bodies, which, if abandoned in the fields, would be stripped naked overnight, they spend their time striving to pile up articles of clothing.

"When their lives come to an end, within three days their bodies will turn into water that washes away, into dust that mixes with the earth, and into smoke that rises up into the sky, leaving no trace behind. Nevertheless, they seek to nurture these bodies and to amass great wealth." (WND-1, 891)

The Daishonin's description of human foolishness in forgetting the inevitability of death and seeking for meaningless things is just as true today as it was then—perhaps even more so. No matter how we may appear to flourish, as long as we sidestep the fundamental issue of life and death, we remain as rootless as floating weeds or like a castle built on sand.

Life is indeed impermanent—but simply being aware of its impermanence is no solution. Despairing over this reality also serves no purpose. The question is how we can create eternal value in this fleeting existence. The Lotus Sutra holds the answer.

Nichiren Daishonin describes the lives of practitioners of the Lotus Sutra very simply as follows: "Passing through the round of births and deaths, one makes one's way on the land of the Dharma nature, or enlightenment, that is inherent within oneself" (OTT, 52).

In other words, those who practice the Lotus Sutra advance serenely and steadily in both life and death on the boundless land of the Dharma nature, the firm ground of Buddhahood. They press onward in the supreme and magnificent "great white ox cart."

The ground of Buddhahood is a state of indestructible happiness. It is the life state of one's own attainment of Buddhahood, as firm and solid as the earth itself. When that life state is established, it continues throughout the three existences of past, present, and future. That's why we must make our best effort in this present existence.

We advance with joy in both life and death on the earth of the Dharma nature. This means that we make our way through repeated cycles of birth and death. We advance upon the earth of our own lives, not the earth of others. That means that happiness is something we build ourselves. It is not something given to us by others. For, ultimately, things given to us by others do not last.

You may depend on your parents, but the day will come when they are no longer there. You may depend on your spouse or partner, but they may die before you. In addition, we never know what changing times will bring. For example, World War II, and the times preceding and following it, were filled with countless tragedies.

The foundation for true happiness is built through one's own efforts, one's own wisdom, one's own good fortune. The purpose of our Buddhist practice is to solidify that foundation, while our Soka Gakkai activities serve to strengthen and empower us. This is the meaning of the Daishonin's words, "one makes one's way on the land of the Dharma nature" (OTT, 52).

The Daishonin also says that wherever we may frolic or play, no harm will come to us; we will move about without fear like the lion king (cf. WND-1, 412).

We will enjoy such a state eternally—that is the aim of our Buddhist faith and practice.

We advance eternally on our own "land." When we die, we do not go either to heaven or to the depths of hell. We remain on the same land or foundation and continue to enact our drama of mission through the cycle of birth and death. We press forward along the golden path of kosen-rufu for all time.

The Daishonin urges us to keep forging ahead on the firm ground of our Buddhahood, experiencing joy in both life and death, and to continue solidifying that all-important foundation. Such is the profound view of life and death taught in Nichiren Buddhism.

From a speech at a nationwide representatives conference, Tokyo, March 29, 1996.

Section 10.7: The Death of Someone Close to Us

Referring to Nichiren Daishonin's encouragement of his disciple Nanjo Tokimitsu and his mother, President Ikeda offers the wisdom we need to accept the suffering of separation from those we love.

How can we overcome the inherent human sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death? The wisdom of Buddhism provides a sound and illuminating answer to this question.

No one can avoid the suffering of having to part from loved ones. Buddhism offers clear insights on this point.

Nanjo Hyoe Shichiro, Nanjo Tokimitsu's father, died of illness while still quite young. Tokimitsu was only seven at the time. By embracing the Daishonin's teachings, unafraid of the persecution this would invite, Hyoe Shichiro had opened the way for transforming the karma of his entire family.

In a letter of encouragement to the lay nun Ueno, Tokimitsu's mother, the Daishonin writes: "When he [your deceased husband] was alive, he was a Buddha in life, and now he is a Buddha in death. He is a Buddha in both life and death" (WND-1, 456).

Life is eternal. Those who dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law are Buddhas in both life and death. Therefore, they will without fail move ahead serenely and confidently in a boundless state of being in which both life and death are filled with joy.

Carrying on her late husband's spirit, the lay nun Ueno maintained strong faith. She raised Tokimitsu and her other children to become outstanding successors who followed in their father's footsteps as sincere practitioners of the Daishonin's Buddhism.

It appears that Tokimitsu must have regretted losing his father at such a young age and thus missing out on receiving instruction and guidance from him. The Daishonin writes: "You lost your father at a very early age, and hence were deprived of his instruction and guidance. When I think of what this must have meant for you, I cannot restrain my tears" (WND-2, 500).

Keenly aware of Tokimitsu's feelings in this regard, the Daishonin encourages and assures him: "Persons who uphold this sutra [the Lotus Sutra], though they may be strangers to one another, will meet on Eagle Peak, a term that symbolizes the Buddha land or the state of Buddhahood, as in the expression 'the pure land of Eagle Peak.' And how much more certain is it that you and your late father, because you both have faith in the Lotus Sutra [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo], will be reborn there together!" (WND-2, 500)

Ties based on the Mystic Law are eternal. A family whose members dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law can be born together again in the same place—such is the wondrous power of the Mystic Law.

Among the Daishonin's followers was a couple who had been moved to embrace his teachings because of the death of their beloved son, the experience contributing to deepening their faith. This husband and wife earnestly practiced the Mystic Law and sincerely supported the Daishonin. In praise of their faith, the Daishonin writes:

"This [the sincerity of your faith] is no ordinary matter. Indeed, Shakyamuni Buddha himself may have taken possession of your body. Or perhaps your deceased son has become a Buddha and, in order to guide his father and mother, has taken possession of your hearts. . . .

"If anything should happen to you, just as the moon emerges to shine in the dark night, so the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo will appear as a moon for you. Be convinced that Shakyamuni Buddha, the Buddhas of the ten directions, and the son who preceded you in death will appear in this moon." (WND-1, 1049–50)

Note on terminology: Myoho-renge-kyo is written with five Chinese characters, while Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is written with seven (nam, or namu, being comprised of two characters). The Daishonin often uses Myoho-renge-kyo synonymously with Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in his writings.

Lives connected by the Mystic Law are always together, transcending the bounds of life and death, encouraging, protecting, and guiding one another as they advance on a course of absolute happiness and victory.

There is no sorrow or gloom in the realm of the Mystic Law. Family members who practice the Mystic Law will always be enveloped in the moonlight of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity—the four noble virtues of Buddhahood. Their lives will impart immeasurable hope and courage to those who follow in their footsteps.

From a speech at a Tokyo Number 2 Area representatives conference, Tokyo, February 20, 2006.

Section 10.8: Our Own Attainment of Buddhahood Enables the Deceased to Attain Buddhahood

Referring to Nichiren Daishonin's writings, President Ikeda explains the principle that our efforts toward our own attainment of Buddhahood are the best offering we can make to the deceased.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin states: "Now when Nichiren and his followers perform ceremonies for the deceased, reciting the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the ray of light from the daimoku reaches all the way to the hell of incessant suffering and makes it possible for them to attain Buddhahood then and there. This is the origin of the prayers for transference of merit for the deceased." (OTT, 17)

The power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is unfathomable. The "light" of the daimoku we chant reaches every corner of the universe, illuminating even those agonizing in the hell of incessant suffering after death and enabling them to attain Buddhahood directly, says the Daishonin.

In "The Offering of an Unlined Robe," the Daishonin writes [to the lady of Sajiki]: "Be firmly convinced that the benefits from this [your sincere offering] will extend to your parents, your grandparents, nay, even to countless living beings" (WND-1, 533). The great benefit of our Buddhist practice dedicated to kosen-rufu also flows on to the deceased as well as to unborn future generations.

Offering prayers based on the Mystic Law—chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—is the best and truest offering we can make for the deceased. Because the Mystic Law has the power to help all people attain Buddhahood, not only those here in the present but throughout the three existences of past, present, and future.

The father of one of the Daishonin's disciples, Joren-bo, was a Nembutsu practitioner. In a letter to Joren-bo after his father's death, the Daishonin writes: "The body that the father and mother leave behind is none other than the physical form and mind of the child. The blessings that you, the Honorable Joren, acquire through your faith in the Lotus Sutra will lend strength to your kind father" (WND-2, 572).

Even if our parents do not practice Nichiren Buddhism, the benefit that we receive as practitioners of the Mystic Law will also become their benefit. We are alive today thanks to our parents. They gave birth to us. As such, our attainment of Buddhahood leads to their attainment of Buddhahood.

The past doesn't matter; it's the present that counts. Our ancestors' actions are not decisive; it is our actions that determine the future. All it takes is one awakened individual to shine like the sun and illuminate all of his or her family members and relations with the light of the Mystic Law.

The Daishonin notes that, without obtaining Buddhahood oneself, it would be difficult to help even one's parents attain Buddhahood, much less help other people to do so (cf. WND-1, 819). Let us take this insight deeply to heart.

From a speech at a spring memorial service, Tokyo, March 21, 2006.

Section 10.10: Sudden and Untimely Deaths

In this excerpt from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) hastens to a regional area to encourage members after the untimely death of one of their central leaders in a car accident.

Throughout his writings, Nichiren Daishonin speaks of the three obstacles and four devils, various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are (1) the obstacle of earthly desires, (2) the obstacle of karma, and (3) the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are (1) the hindrance of the five components, (2) the hindrance of earthly desires, (3) the hindrance of death, and (4) the hindrance of the devil king. The hindrance of death is a devilish function that serves to arouse doubt and confusion through the death of those striving diligently in Buddhist practice.

We all have our own karma, but as ordinary mortals we cannot grasp its depth. Even should steadfast practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism die young, their death will enable them to actualize the Buddhist principle of "lessening karmic retribution." This term, which literally means "transforming the heavy and receiving it lightly," appears in the Nirvana Sutra. "Heavy" indicates negative karma accumulated over countless lifetimes in the past. As a benefit of protecting the correct teaching of Buddhism, we can experience relatively light karmic retribution in this lifetime, thereby expiating heavy karma that ordinarily would adversely affect us not only in this lifetime, but over many lifetimes to come. Those who strive energetically for kosen-rufu as genuine practitioners of the Mystic Law are certain to attain Buddhahood, however their lives may end.

An early Buddhist scripture tells the story of a lay believer named Mahanama. He asked the Buddha where and in what form of existence he would be reborn were he to suddenly meet his end in an accident due to being distracted by the bustle of the town instead of concentrating his thoughts on the Three Treasures—the Buddha, the Law, and the Buddhist Order.

The Buddha responded: "For instance, Mahanama, if a tree bends to the east, slopes to the east, tends to the east, which way will it fall when its root is cut?"

To which Mahanama replied: "It will fall [in the direction that] it bends, slopes and tends."

Through this story, the Buddha taught that those who embrace Buddhism and practice assiduously, even if they were to meet with an unexpected, accidental death, will be carried by the Law in the direction of rebirth in good circumstances.

Shin'ichi then began to talk about the death of Isamu Ishizaki [a central leader in Tottori Prefecture]: "There may be some members who are wondering why, given that he practiced Nichiren Buddhism, Mr. Ishizaki met with such an accident. The causes and effects inherent deep in our lives, the workings of our karma, are strict indeed. That is why, even if we practice Nichiren Buddhism, the manner of our death can occur in any number of ways.

"There may be some who die giving their lives in the struggle to uphold Buddhism, like Mr. Makiguchi who died in prison for his beliefs. There may be some who die young as a result of illness or accidents. But when viewed through the eyes of faith, it all has some extremely profound meaning.

"Those who have dedicated their lives to working for kosen-rufu are Bodhisattvas of the Earth, an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law. They are followers of the Buddha. Life is eternal. In light of the teaching of the Mystic Law, such people will absolutely attain Buddhahood. Their surviving family members will also definitely be protected. I state unequivocally that, as long as those left behind continue to persevere in faith, the good fortune and benefit accumulated through their loved ones' dedication to kosen-rufu will also pass on to them, and they will, without fail, enjoy unsurpassed happiness."

Hearing Shin'ichi's tremendous conviction, the feelings of doubt that had been clouding the members' minds evaporated and the sun of hope began to rise in their hearts.

Shin'ichi continued: "Being without a spouse or partner doesn't mean that we will never be happy. Prestige and wealth also do not guarantee happiness. True happiness, absolute happiness, is only found when we awaken to the fact that our lives embody the Mystic Law, carry out our human revolution, and manifest the great life state of Buddhahood through our Buddhist practice. We are born alone and we die alone. Only the Mystic Law has the power to protect us across the three existences of past, present, and future.

"If you continue devoting yourselves earnestly to kosen-rufu, the Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the ten directions and three existences will protect you. Therefore, no matter what happens, no matter what others may say or how badly they may treat you, you must never be swayed or shaken. If you become cowardly and distance yourself from faith, you will only end up miserable.

"Life is eternal, but this present lifetime flashes by in an instant. I hope you will be aware of your mission in this existence, devote yourselves to kosen-rufu, and accumulate abundant good fortune."

From The New Human Revolution, vol. 10, "Bastion of the Pen" chapter.

Section 10.12: Transforming the Sufferings of Birth and Death

Buddhist practice to accumulate the treasures of the heart in this lifetime is crucial to overcoming the sufferings of birth and death and attaining a state of eternal happiness.

According to a Buddhist story, seven elder Brahmans once traveled from afar to visit Shakyamuni. Though they had made the long trip to learn about the Buddhist teachings from him, they spent their days in the lodging where they were staying, engaged in idle conversation, laughing and amusing themselves.

Shakyamuni came to see them and said: "All beings rely on five things. What are the five? One, they rely on their youth. Two, they rely on their upright appearance. Three, they rely on their great strength. Four, they rely on their wealth. Five, they rely on their noble family. While you, seven sirs, are speaking in a low tone or loudly laughing, what do you rely on?"

Shakyamuni then went on to tell them that life is uncertain and fleeting, characterized by the four sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death. Hearing Shakyamuni, the seven Brahmans realized for the first time what they should be doing and began to strive seriously in their practice.

"What do you rely on?" Shakyamuni asked. In other words, what sustains you in this life?

Nichiren Daishonin teaches three treasures in life: the treasures of the storehouse, the treasures of the body, and the treasures of the heart (cf. WND-1, 851).

The five things that all beings rely on in the story all correspond to the treasures of the storehouse or the treasures of the body. Wealth, of course, corresponds to the treasures of the storehouse. Youth, beauty, health, and ability, along with social status, correspond to the treasures of the body. All of these things have value in life, and it may be natural, in that respect, for us to pursue them. But the question is whether they are really genuine treasures in life that can offer eternal sustenance.

Let me give some concrete examples. Some people are harmed or killed for their wealth. Those who are physically attractive may be envied or exploited by others. Fame and power can lead people to become arrogant and ruin their lives, and there are many of high social position who allow themselves to be seduced by the devilish nature of power, to their own undoing. None of these so-called treasures continue forever.

As such, the treasures of the storehouse and the treasures of the body are not genuine sustenance that can provide true happiness. On their own, they cannot enable us to lead a life of real fulfillment.

What do we need to live such a life? The Daishonin tells us: "The treasures of the heart are the most valuable of all" (WND-1, 851).

The treasures of the heart refer to faith in the Mystic Law. Faith is the eternal treasure and sustenance of human life. It encompasses immeasurable benefit and boundless good fortune. Its power is as vast as the universe and can transform our entire environment or world. It is the source of inexhaustible joy and immense wisdom and compassion, enabling us to employ the treasures of the storehouse and the treasures of the body to attain eternal happiness.

Each of you already possesses this supreme sustenance of life. All you have to do is tap its limitless power.

Life is brief. Youth passes by in a flash, easily wasted in indecision, complaining, criticizing others, or being defeated by one's own laziness. Every day is precious.

I hope you will spend your youth in a fulfilling manner, leading strong lives in the real world and at the same time contemplating the vast universe, pondering eternity, and making each day worth a thousand years, a thousand eons.

From a speech at an Okinawa Prefecture youth division representatives training course, Okinawa, February 19, 1988.
