Chapter 6: The Principle of "Cherry, Plum, Peach, and Damson"

Section 6.1: "Still I Will Bloom"

Buddhism teaches the principle of cherry, plum, peach, and damson, that every being is beautiful and valuable as it is, without trying to be something else.

Everyone possesses the seed of a precious mission. The purpose of our lives is to make that seed sprout, flourish, and blossom.

On a visit to Yamagata Prefecture, President Ikeda explains this principle and urges us to dedicate our lives to our mission.

This is my first visit to Yamagata in nine years. Wishing to see you all as soon as possible, I took the train here from Niigata. From the train window, I could see blue streams and green forests amid the lingering mountain snow. Golden forsythia, bridal veil, daffodils, and cherry blossoms were in beautiful bloom.

Observing the scenery, I was reminded of how, in The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin states that the cherry, plum, peach, and damson each embody the ultimate truth just as they are, without undergoing any change (cf. OTT, 200). The Daishonin says: "Each thing, the cherry, the plum, the peach, the damson, in its own entity, without undergoing any change, possesses the eternally endowed three bodies [of the Buddha]" (OTT, 200).

This teaching provides us with a basic model for the way we should live our lives.

The cherry tree blossoms as a cherry tree, living to fulfill its own unique role. The same is true of the plum, peach, and damson trees. Each of us should do likewise. We each have a unique personality. We have a distinct nature and character, and our lives are each noble and respectworthy. That's why we should always live with a solid self-identity, in a way that is true to ourselves.

Each of us has a mission and a way of life that is ours alone. We don't need to try to be like anyone else. The cherry tree has its own life and inherent causes for being a cherry. The plum, peach, and damson also each have their own inherent causes. And in the same way, from the viewpoint of Buddhism, we each have a mission we were born to carry out in this world, and each one of us has our own inherent causes to be who we are. Practicing the Mystic Law enables us to experience the joy of discovering this.

The most fundamental happiness in life is to bring forth our inner Buddhahood through the power of faith in the Mystic Law.

Some of you may envy those who live in bustling cities such as Tokyo. Others might wish to have a glamorous job, or live in a big luxurious house. But in Tokyo, you can't enjoy this natural environment of Yamagata with its pure, clean air, the bright moonlight or the twinkling stars at night, or beautiful mountains draped softly in their white mantles, like Mount Zao standing out against the morning sky. At the same time, our happiness in life does not depend on the land or environment in which we live, our workplace, or the size of our homes.

The grass always seems greener on the other side. To those living in Yamagata, life in the big city might seem appealing, but city dwellers long for the beautiful natural environment of Yamagata. The key is to give full play to our capabilities and carry out our mission in our own communities, wherever we are, without being swayed by immediate circumstances or events.

A writer once remarked: "Whether seen by others or not, still I will bloom." This quote is from the Mushanokoji Saneatsu zenshu, or Collected Writings of Saneatsu Mushanokoji.

The Gohonzon is aware of all our actions. It is important to live in our own unique way, always embraced by the Mystic Law, whether or not anyone is watching. This is what the principle of cherry, plum, peach, and damson teaches.

From a speech at a Yamagata Prefecture general meeting, Yamagata, April 18, 1983.

Section 6.2: Bringing Out Our Positive Qualities

In this excerpt from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda), after attending a student division meeting, encourages a young person who is worried about being timid by nature.

Shin'ichi said: "Gentleness and timidity can be seen as two different expressions of the same underlying nature. When that underlying nature takes the form of gentleness, it's a strength; when it takes the form of timidity, it can be a weakness. When that underlying nature consistently acts as a weakness, it can become the cause of unhappiness.

"For example, people with a fiery temper by nature may often end up arguing with coworkers. This could alienate those around them, making for strained relations. In some cases, their hotheadedness could even lead to them being fired or quitting. And since that is their underlying nature, the same problem is sure to crop up wherever they go.

"Our basic underlying natures don't change, but through our Buddhist practice, we can redirect our natures in a positive manner. Nichiren Daishonin says: 'When one comes to realize and see that each thing, the cherry, the plum, the peach, the damson, in its own entity, without undergoing any change, possesses the eternally endowed three bodies [of the Buddha]' (OTT, 200).

"Buddhism teaches the way for each of us, just as we are, to attain happiness while bringing out the best of our innate disposition and potential, in the same way that the cherry, plum, peach, and damson each manifest their own unique nature.

"People with fiery tempers are often also passionate, with a strong sense of right and wrong. By exerting themselves in Buddhist practice, they will no longer lose their tempers about unimportant things, but become people strongly committed to opposing evil and injustice.

"Likewise, people who tend to be too agreeable or easily manipulated by others are often very kindhearted and able to get along well with others. Through practicing Buddhism, they can bring out this latter strong side of their natures. Positively transforming ourselves in this way is what we call human revolution. The important thing is how to make that transformation happen.

"Basically, the key is to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and continue developing your life. It's crucial to reflect on yourself and discover your problematic qualities and life tendencies.

"We all have faults. Perhaps we tend to blame others when something bad happens to us, or we lack perseverance, or are unwilling to listen to the opinions of others. These faults can become negative tendencies obstructing our personal growth and happiness.

"But unless someone points these negative tendencies out to us, we may not be aware of them. That's where our seniors in faith and fellow members come in. They can draw our attention to them and support us in the effort to overcome them. We also need to chant earnestly to challenge and transform our negative tendencies.

"In addition, we can also forge and develop ourselves through Soka Gakkai activities. As Nichiren Daishonin writes: 'The flaws in iron come to the surface when it is forged' (WND-1, 497).

"Refusing to allow our weaknesses to defeat us and triumphing in one activity after another is the way we train and strengthen ourselves; it is the path of human revolution for each of us to win over our negative tendencies. Soka Gakkai activities are the 'place of practice' or 'training ground' where we develop and strengthen our lives. By dedicating ourselves to the mission of kosen-rufu and continuing to strengthen and improve ourselves, we can also transform our karma."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 16, "Heart and Soul" chapter.

Section 6.4: Appreciating Your Uniqueness

President Ikeda encourages an SGI-USA member who asked how to deal with his lack of self-confidence.

No one has absolute confidence in themselves. In fact, it is quite normal not to have much confidence. In many cases, people who go around bragging about their confidence are merely arrogant, always clashing with and greatly disliked by those around them. A person can be miserable with either too much or too little self-confidence.

The important thing is that all of you shine in your own way, win in your own daily endeavors, and develop your life in the way most suitable and natural for you. All you need to do is just keep on improving yourself as you steadily advance toward your goal.

After all, you are you, not someone else. There is no need for you to compare yourself with others; it's your life. The important question is, What do you really feel and think in the depths of your being? Buddhism expounds the principle of cherry, plum, peach, and damson, each having their own unique characteristics, and the related principle of "illuminating and manifesting one's true nature" (cf. WND-1, 746).

Cherry blossoms are cherry blossoms, and peach blossoms are peach blossoms. A cherry blossom can never become a peach blossom. Nor is there any need for it to try to do so. It would be perfectly miserable if it did. Similarly, you are none other than yourself. You can never be someone else, however much you might wish it. What matters is that you become the kind of person who can cherish, praise, and feel content with your own precious, irreplaceable life.

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is fundamental to this, enabling you to reveal your innate Buddhahood just as you are. Not only will chanting give you a wonderful, fundamental self-confidence, it will also adorn and dignify your life with the brilliance of your true and highest potential.

Please have absolute confidence in yourself, because you are living the noblest possible life, with a beautiful heart.

From a question-and-answer session with SGI-USA Culture Department representatives, Nagano, August 7, 1992.

Section 6.5: Developing Your Own Individuality

In Dialogue of Hope, addressed to junior high school students, President Ikeda talks about individuality and being oneself.

Seeking to show their individuality or stand out from the crowd, some young people rush to adopt the latest fashions. But often, all they end up doing is looking just like everyone else. What sense is there in that?

Quite frankly, it almost seems as if there is some kind of set image of what individualism is, with everyone trying to conform to that image. But that image, in most cases, is just something created by the mass media and people trying to turn a profit, a fashion or trend that has been deliberately manufactured.

That's why being truly individualistic is actually quite difficult. First, you need to have a solid sense of who you are. You have to open your own eyes and look at the world, open your ears and listen to what others are saying, use your brain and think for yourself, and have the courage to follow through with your convictions.

It's much easier to just conform and be like everyone else. Even when people try to free themselves from the constraints that are holding them back, they often find themselves adopting someone else's standards. Japanese people have a strong tendency for this kind of mass conformity.

Genuine individuality isn't just a matter of style or outward appearance; it emanates from the inside out.

Someone has said that your individuality is a singular treasure that only you possess. It may be difficult for you to know exactly what that treasure is right now, but you definitely possess such a treasure, which you share with no one else. Each and every one of you does, with absolutely no exception!

If there are those who claim they don't possess this treasure, then it is because they themselves have decided they are worthless. Such thinking causes one to destroy one's own precious treasure.

Of course, even when trying to "be themselves," there are many people who don't know what that means. That's quite natural. In fact, all too often what people think of as being true to themselves or exercising their individuality is something they have borrowed or copied from others. That's why, if you think who you are right now is all there is to you, you are very much mistaken. Human beings have the capacity to change. Who you are now is really no more than the starting point for an even more wonderful you in the future.

Telling yourself, for instance, "I'm a poor speaker, so I'll stay in the background," is not living true to yourself. Instead, suppose you earnestly challenge yourself with the spirit to become a person who, though maybe not naturally a good talker, can bravely speak out and stop someone from bullying another, or can speak up for what's right at a crucial moment. Then, by making that kind of effort, your own unique character will shine in a way that is different from those who are naturally good speakers. That will be your individuality.

Your individuality only really starts to shine when you strive with all your might, challenging yourself with every last ounce of your energy. It won't if you don't develop yourself. Only through making efforts to improve and grow will your individuality shine, just as a sword is forged in the flames. Your individuality is your own unique weapon for making the most of your life. It is your jeweled sword.

People who have splendidly developed their individuality are beautiful. Everyone finds them attractive. Theirs is not a fleeting, temporary beauty, but an enduring, lifelong one. Such people's spirit is as bright and clear as the skies over the high plains in summer. They are never envious or jealous of others.

In Japan, there is a tendency to try to drag down people who have real individuality and character. There is a narrow-minded mentality that seeks conformism, as exemplified by the Japanese proverb, "The nail that sticks out gets hammered down." This is inspired by the jealousy and resentment of people who have no solid sense of identity or self-confidence and are always concerned about what others are doing, thinking, or saying, allowing themselves to be swayed this way and that.

In contrast, people who have worked hard and long to develop their own identities take delight in seeing others develop theirs to the fullest, too. They support and encourage them in their efforts. They take joy in others' successes. And they have the capacity to work for the happiness and welfare of others.

I hope all of you will become such bighearted, truly beautiful people. Become people whom others admire and respect.

From Dialogue of Hope, published in Japanese in June 2003.

Section 6.6: Be a Shining Presence like the Sun

In Discussions on Youth, President Ikeda talks with high school students and other young people about the keys to finding their unique mission and becoming a shining presence.

When you live in a way that is true to yourself, your real value as a human being shines through. Buddhism teaches the concept of "illuminating and manifesting one's true nature" (cf. WND-1, 746). This means to reveal your genuine innate self, your true inherent potential, and bring it to shine, illuminating all around you. It refers to your most refined individuality and uniqueness.

The important thing is to be patient, to have the confidence and determination that you will achieve something meaningful in the future. Don't be impatient in your youth. Your true substance as human beings will be determined 10, 20, or 30 years from now. What matters is the kind of people you become then and whether you are fulfilling your mission then. Each of you has a mission that only you can fulfill. If you did not have such a mission, you would not have been born.

There are many kinds of mountains in this world. Some are high and some are low. And there are a great many different kinds of rivers. Some long, some short. Despite their differences, however, all mountains are mountains and all rivers are rivers.

There are serene mountains like the ones in the ancient Japanese capital of Nara, and there are rugged mountains like Kyushu's Mount Aso, Japan's largest active volcano. Then there are the grand snowcapped peaks of the Himalayas. All of these mountains are beautiful and impressive in their own way.

The same is so with rivers. There is Hokkaido's Ishikari River, home to magnificent salmon, as well as Nagano's Chikuma River, which has inspired countless poets. There is the Yellow River in China, and the Amazon in South America, rivers so wide that in some places the opposite shore cannot be seen. Each of these rivers has its own special beauty.

The same is true of people. Each of you has a unique mission in life. Moreover, you have encountered the Mystic Law while still young. You have a mission that is yours and yours alone. That is an indisputable fact, one in which I would like you to have conviction and pride.

You won't find your mission by standing still. Please challenge yourselves in something, it doesn't matter what. Then, by your making consistent efforts, the direction you should take will open up before you quite naturally. It's important, therefore, to have the courage to ask yourselves what you should be doing now, at this very moment.

The key, in other words, is to climb the mountain before you. As you ascend its slopes, you will develop your "muscles," increasing your strength and endurance. Such training will enable you to challenge still higher mountains. It is vital that you continue making such efforts. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo will enable you to bring forth the life force necessary to succeed.

Chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and climb the mountain in front of you. When you reach the summit, wide new horizons will stretch out before you. Little by little, you will understand your own mission.

Those who never forget that they have a unique mission are strong. Whatever problems they have, they will not be defeated. They will transform all their problems into fuel for growth toward a hope-filled future.

The important thing, therefore, is to resolve to be a shining presence like the sun. If you do so, all darkness will be dispelled. Live confidently, determined to be the sun in your environment, no matter what happens.

Of course, in life, there are both sunny days and cloudy ones. But even on cloudy days, the sun still shines. The same is true for people. Even when we are struggling, we mustn't let the light go out in our hearts.

All people have a unique mission that only they can fulfill. But that doesn't mean you should simply wait for someone to tell you what yours is. It is important that you discover your mission on your own.

Precious gems start out buried underground. If no one mines them, they'll stay buried. And if they aren't polished once they've been dug out, they will remain rough and dull.

All of you, my young friends, possess a jewel. You are each like a mountain with a hidden treasure. What a shame it would be to spend your entire life without uncovering it!

It is often said that everyone is a genius at something. Being talented doesn't just mean being a good musician, writer, or athlete, there are many kinds of talent. For instance, you may be a great conversationalist or make friends easily or put others at ease. Or you may have a gift for nursing, a knack for telling jokes, selling things, or economizing. You may be someone who is always punctual, patient, steady, kind, or optimistic. Or you may love new challenges, be strongly committed to peace, or bring joy to others.

Each of you is as unique as a cherry, plum, peach, or damson blossom (cf. OTT, 200), as Nichiren Daishonin explains. Please bloom in the way that only you can.

Without a doubt, you each possess within you a jewel, your own innate talent. How can you discover that talent? The only way is to challenge yourself to the limit. Your true potential will emerge when you give everything you've got to your studies, sports, or whatever you take on.

The most important thing is getting into the habit of challenging yourself to the limit in this way. In a sense, the results you get don't matter all that much. The actual grades you receive in high school, for instance, won't decide the rest of your life. But the habit of challenging yourself to the limit will in time bear fruit. It will distinguish you from others without fail and bring your unique talents to shine.

It has been said that we can only become as big as our dreams. That is why you should have big dreams. But it's important to remember that dreams are dreams and reality is reality. If you want to realize your dreams, you have to take a hard look at reality and then make all-out efforts toward your goals.

Mr. Toda once said: "Young people must have the determination to excel at something." Determination, tenacity of purpose, is crucial. Halfhearted effort will not make the precious jewel of your unique talents shine.

From Discussions on Youth, published in Japanese in March 1999.

Section 6.7: Advancing Freely and Steadily

President Ikeda prefaced a question-and-answer session with Bharat (India) Soka Gakkai members by stating that "open discussion in which participants can speak freely and ask anything on their minds is a Buddhist tradition dating back to the times of Shakyamuni." In this excerpt, he offers encouragement to a men's division member who said he found it difficult to master the qualities of eloquence, wisdom, and compassion that the guidance of the Soka Gakkai suggests we aspire to.

Just be yourself. All you have to do is keep chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and advance freely in a manner that is true to yourself. That is what the Buddhist principle of "illuminating and manifesting one's true nature" (cf. WND-1, 746) is all about. By practicing Nichiren Buddhism, we can bring our true self to shine. If this were not the case, we'd be frauds. Naturally, we should exert ourselves in our human revolution, but there is absolutely no need to resort to false or contrived eloquence, compassion, or wisdom.

What's important is to continue making effort daily, chanting and praying for the happiness of others, doing your best to be kind and considerate to those around you, and polishing your own character. But, as Mr. Toda often pointed out, if you can't treasure your spouse or those closest to you, you won't be able to treasure others. Compassion, he said, doesn't flow forth so easily.

Surely the correct path and most dignified way to live is to advance just as we are, as ordinary people, striving to improve ourselves even just by small increments based on chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Nichiren Buddhism is a great teaching that is open to all people; it does not make irrational or unreasonable demands.

From a question-and-answer session on the occasion of a Bharat (India) Soka Gakkai gongyo meeting, India, February 16, 1992.

Section 6.9: Building a Harmonious World of Brilliant Diversity

In a lecture at the East-West Center in Hawaii, President Ikeda discusses the principle of cherry, plum, peach, and damson and Buddhism's respect for diversity and affirmation of the worth of all people.

In the teachings of Nichiren, we find the passage: "The cherry, the plum, the peach, the damson... without undergoing any change..." (OTT, 200). These words confirm that there is no need for all to become "cherries" or "plums," but that each should manifest the unique brilliance of his or her own character.

This simile points to a fundamental principle of appreciation for diversity that applies equally to human beings and to social and natural environments. As the concept of "illuminating and manifesting one's true nature" (cf. WND-1, 746) indicates, the prime mission of Buddhism is to enable each and all to blossom to the fullest of their potential. The fulfillment of the individual, however, cannot be realized in conflict with, or at the expense of, others, but only through active appreciation of uniqueness and difference, for these are the varied hues that together weave the flower gardens of life.

Nichiren's teachings also contain the following parable: When you face a mirror and bow respectfully, the image in the mirror likewise bows to you respectfully (cf. OTT, 165).

I think this beautifully expresses the all-encompassing causality that is the heart of Buddhism. The respect we demonstrate for the lives of others returns to us, with mirror-like certainty, ennobling our lives.

The Buddhist principle of dependent origination reflects a cosmology in which all human and natural phenomena come into existence within a matrix of interrelatedness. Thus, we are urged to respect the uniqueness of each existence, which supports and nourishes all within the larger, living whole.

From a lecture at the East-West Center, "Peace and Human Security: A Buddhist Perspective for the Twenty-First Century," U.S.A., January 26, 1995.

Section 6.10: The Wisdom for Fostering the Positive Potential in All People

In a peace proposal commemorating the 23rd SGI Day in 1998, President Ikeda discusses the Buddhist principle of cherry, plum, peach, and damson as a source for creating new value, transcending all differences to build a world of harmony and peaceful coexistence.

Education does not mean coercing people to fit one rigid and unvaried mold; this is mere ideological indoctrination. Rather, it represents the most effective means of fostering the positive potential inherent in all people, self-restraint, empathy for others and the unique personality and character of each person. To do this, education must be a personal, even spiritual encounter and interaction between human beings, between teacher and learner.

The teachings of Buddhism employ the analogy of flowering fruit trees, cherry, plum, peach, and damson, each blossoming and bearing fruit in its own unique way, to express the value of diversity. Each living thing, in other words, has a distinct character, individuality, and purpose in this world. Accordingly, people should develop their own unique capabilities as they work to build a world of cooperation where all people acknowledge both their differences and their fundamental equality, a world where a rich diversity of peoples and cultures is nourished, each enjoying respect and harmony.

The late Dr. David L. Norton, the respected American philosopher who was well versed in the educational philosophy of Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, shared his view of the Buddhist model of diversity in a 1991 address titled "Human Education for World Citizenship" to the Education Division of the Soka Gakkai in Osaka:

"For the reorganized world that must come, our responsibility as educators is to cultivate in our students a sensibility of respect and appreciation of cultures, beliefs, and practices that differ from their own. This can only be done on the basis of the recognition that other cultures, beliefs, and practices embody aspects of truth and goodness, as the blossoms of the cherry tree, the sour plum, the sweet plum, and the pear tree each embody beauty in a distinctive aspect. To achieve this means that our students must abandon the supposition that the beliefs and practices with which they are most familiar have a monopoly on truth and goodness. This supposition is called parochialism, or narrow-mindedness when it is the innocent result of ignorance, but it breeds the aggressive absolutism of the 'closed society' mentality."

Soon after World War II, as the East-West ideological confrontation escalated, second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda spoke of the underlying unity of the human race, calling for the realization of a "global family." His appeal grew from the same roots as what today is called "world citizenship" and sought to transcend the constraints of self-centered and bigoted nationalism. There are, of course, those who believe a clash of civilizations to be unavoidable. My view is that such a clash would not occur between civilizations, but between the savage elements that lurk within each civilization. If people from different cultural traditions are willing to work over time to build tolerant and enduring links, rather than indulging in the temptation to dominate and forcibly influence others, the very nature of culture is such that humanity will be enriched by their interaction, and their differences will give birth to new values.

The role of religion must be to provide the wisdom which can propel the effort toward mutual development and improvement. In this connection, Buddhism teaches that one meaning of myo, meaning mystic, is "to open" (cf. WND-1, 145). The constant seeking after improvement and growth, the desire to open up latent potentialities, is a special characteristic of human life. What is urgently sought today is religion that responds to this desire for growth and fulfillment.

The sad historical reality, however, is one of endless strife, bloodshed, and tragedy originating from religion and religious differences. As Nichiren wrote, "The true path [of life] lies in the affairs of this world" (WND-1, 1126). I interpret this as meaning that if we are to avoid repeating the errors of the past, religions must give first priority to serving the needs of real people in their daily lives and finding solutions to the problems facing human society. In this way, they must provide the spiritual basis for peaceful competition.

A hopeful future can be opened up by overcoming what Toda criticized as narrow self-centeredness and by promoting the humanitarian competition that Makiguchi advocated, the shared work of value-creation among people committed to living together as global neighbors. Indeed, this is the core objective of the SGI's movement of what we call "human revolution."

From a peace proposal commemorating the 23rd SGI Day, January 26, 1998.
