Chapter 26: Leaders Who Guide Others to Happiness

Section 26.1: A Leadership Revolution

The purpose of the Soka Gakkai and kosen-rufu is to enable everyone to lead lives of joy and fulfillment. Through President Ikeda's peerless leadership and commitment to helping people actualize happy lives, the Soka Gakkai has overcome all obstacles to usher in the dawn of worldwide kosen-rufu.

This chapter focuses on President Ikeda's leadership philosophy, which serves as an eternal guideline for all Soka Gakkai leaders.

In the first excerpt, President Ikeda introduces the leadership ideals of his predecessors, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi and Josei Toda. He then explains that Soka Gakkai leaders are people who always respect, encourage, and work for the happiness of others. Such people embody a revolution in leadership, he says.

In your respective communities and societies, you are volunteering your time and energy to chant and work for the members' happiness, to support and encourage them with heartfelt care and concern. Your actions are those of great bodhisattvas; your spirit, that of noble Buddhas.

Nichiren Daishonin cites the following words: "The truer the teaching, the lower the stage [of those it can bring to enlightenment]" (WND-1, 785-86). This quote is from Miao-lo's Annotations on "Great Concentration and Insight." In other words, the more correct a Buddhist teaching, the greater the number of people it will lead to happiness. If we apply this principle to the leaders who spearhead efforts to spread the teaching, we can take it to mean that the deeper their faith, the more they will respect their fellow practitioners and the harder they will work to help even more people become happy.

In the light of the law of cause and effect, through the good fortune we accumulate by treasuring and caring for many people, we will be able to attain a state of life in which we are protected and supported by many others in this and future existences. Our Buddhist practice today is the cause for becoming great leaders in lifetime after lifetime.

In his Soka kyoikugaku taikei (The System of Value-Creating Education), founding Soka Gakkai president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi called for a leadership revolution. He insisted that we must bring to an end an age where those in positions of authority use people as a means for perpetuating their own power. And he stressed the need to produce a steady stream of new leaders who will dedicate their lives to contributing to people's happiness.

Leaders must not place themselves above others. And they most certainly should never look down on people, thinking themselves somehow special. Only when one resolves to work together with others, respecting them and being willing to humbly learn from everyone, is one on the way to becoming a great leader. These were some of the key points of the leadership revolution envisaged by Mr. Makiguchi.

Are you taking action for members' happiness and for kosen-rufu, or are you using the organization and its members for selfish purposes? There will be a huge difference in outcome depending on your inner attitude, which no one else can see.

My mentor, Mr. Toda, once said:

"Those of you gathered here today are Soka Gakkai leaders. I am sure all of you are not only striving for your own happiness but are determined that everyone you are guiding becomes happy as well.

"Becoming happy yourself is no great challenge; it's quite simple. But the essence of Nichiren Buddhism lies in helping others become happy, too. Only when you sincerely chant to the Gohonzon, strengthen your faith, and have a spirit of selfless dedication to your Buddhist practice can you truly guide and lead others."

I hope that, as leaders of our movement, you will strive with a passionate vow to help others become happy and win in their lives.

It's especially important that you as leaders praise and encourage your fellow members. Never lose your temper and scold or berate people.

Those who praise their fellow members will build lives of boundless good fortune as indestructible as the Himalayas, king of all mountain ranges.

The Daishonin also writes: "The more one praises the blessings of the Lotus Sutra, the more one's own blessings will increase. Bear in mind that the twenty-eight chapters of the Lotus Sutra contain only a few passages elucidating the truth, but a great many words of praise" (WND-1, 673).

Let's start by offering words of praise. All of us are human and bound to experience ups and downs in our moods and emotions from time to time. But as leaders, let's always make a point of starting off by warmly greeting everyone and expressing our appreciation for their efforts. Doing so lifts not only others' hearts but also our own, spreading joy and increasing benefit for everyone.

From a speech at an SGI general meeting, USA, June 23, 1996.

Section 26.2: Have a Big Heart

President Ikeda notes that a defining feature of Soka Gakkai leaders is their noble spirit to value others, learn from them, and impart assurance and joy to all.

Bighearted people are happy. Our Buddhist practice enables us to become such individuals. I hope all of you will become people who are generous and broad-minded.

The vast ocean has boundless capacity, whereas the capacity of a small pond is very limited.

Nichiren Buddhism is as all-encompassing as the universe itself. Let us who practice it lead wonderful, expansive lives, treasuring those around us - family, friends, and fellow members - embracing everyone with our big hearts and enjoying life together.

Of course, we must fight firmly and unremittingly against inhumanity and injustice, but I hope you will always be generous toward your friends and fellow members, and have room in your hearts to think about the happiness of others.

Wishing to do whatever we can to support and encourage those facing illness or financial hardship; thinking about others, chanting for them, and taking action to help them - this is the spirit of practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism. Striving to bring happiness and joy to others, even though we may be struggling with problems ourselves, is the mark of bodhisattvas.

I'd like you to become people with big hearts - people who remain strong and unshaken no matter what happens, and who, rather than focusing on themselves, are concerned with helping and imparting hope to others. This is the purpose of our Buddhist practice. When we persevere in Buddhist practice, we will accumulate solid good fortune without fail.

Always be open to learning from others. If you see someone whose faith or family life inspires you, for instance, have the spirit to learn from them. You can learn something from anyone. Always being humble enough to learn from others is a measure of a person's true greatness.

Leaders, in particular, are susceptible to becoming arrogant, believing their position in the organization makes them better than others. This is a common tendency. In such cases, a person acts with self-importance and looks down on those of outstanding character or achievement. But those who behave this way only alienate others and erase their own good fortune.

The higher a leader's position in the organization, the stronger must be their willingness to learn from others. This is especially important because, from the perspective of Buddhism and the Law - from the perspective of faith - our members are all "Buddhas and heavenly deities."

The role of leaders is to bring joy to others. That is the basic requirement of a leader.

In general, those who cause distress or pain to others, who try to dominate and control others, are not qualified to be leaders. This is all the more so in the realm of Nichiren Buddhism. Arrogant leaders who let their positions go to their heads will incur the dislike of others, and ultimately bring unhappiness upon themselves.

I'd like you to work hard to become the kind of leaders whom others regard as a source of reassurance, clarity, peace of mind, and courage - people who inspire confidence and hope. Never issue commands or orders from on high. Be kind and considerate leaders who warmly impart a sense of security to everyone. Be strict with yourselves and generous toward others. That's the hallmark of people with strong faith.

From a speech at a meeting in Santa Monica, USA, September 18, 1993.

Section 26.3: Lead by Example

Through the example of Mahatma Gandhi, leader of the Indian independence movement, President Ikeda underscores the importance of first setting an example by changing ourselves if we wish to help others change.

I would like to relate a story that Mahatma Gandhi's grandson Arun Gandhi shared from his childhood.

When he was about six or seven, Arun lived in an ashram community with his grandfather. One of his friends was a boy of about the same age, who was living there with his parents. This friend was very fond of sweets, consuming them in great quantity. As a result, he started getting a rash all over his body. No matter how his parents nagged him to stop eating sweets, he wouldn't listen. Since there were always sweets around, he would simply grab some to eat when nobody was looking.

Worried, his mother went to see Gandhi and urged him to speak to her son and explain to him that he should not eat sweets anymore.

After hearing the mother's story, Gandhi said: "Please come back in 15 days and I will speak to him."

Perplexed, the mother did as asked and returned 15 days later. Gandhi took the boy aside and spoke to him for less than a minute. That was all, but surprisingly, from then on the boy stopped eating sweets.

His mother was puzzled. What kind of miracle had Gandhi performed on her son, she wondered. A few days later, she went to ask Gandhi this question herself. He replied that it was no miracle. "The reason I asked you to come back in 15 days," he said, "was that I had to give up eating sweets for 15 days before I could ask the child to give up eating them." He had told this to the boy and added that he himself would not touch any sweets until the boy's rash had healed and he was able to eat sweets again.

In other words, Mahatma Gandhi lived by the creed "I'll challenge myself, so please do so, too." This was the secret of his success in changing the young boy's attitude.

Arun Gandhi further remarked that leaders and educators are persuasive only when they set a good example themselves. This was Mahatma Gandhi's conviction, he said, and the secret to his charismatic leadership. He added that the essence of nonviolence is the ability to educate people, and education is about being a positive role model.

The key to the Soka Gakkai's development, too, has been the fine example set by the leaders themselves, their dedicated efforts and hard work. When leaders fail to exert themselves, they become bureaucratic and lapse into empty rhetoric.

As a country, Japan today is badly deadlocked, and all kinds of remedies are being recommended, each presented as the best or surest way to recovery. And while any advice is worth considering, many of those handing it out are overlooking one very simple but very important point: the need for those offering advice to set good examples themselves. If the people making fine speeches and proposals actually did what they preached, surely the country would soon be in fine shape. But the exact opposite is true. There are far too many political leaders who seek only personal gain and advantage while urging others to show patience and self-restraint.

We find a similar scenario in the case of the child in Arun Gandhi's story. The reason there were always sweets around was that the child's entire family loved sweets and were always eating them. It is hardly surprising that they could not convince him to give up sweets under such circumstances.

Why could people endure the bitter struggle for Indian independence? Despite the difficult hurdles to self-rule once thought impossible to overcome, people still followed Gandhi. Why? Because he never asked others to do anything he had never done himself. Gandhi always stood at the forefront of protests and marches. He always went where there was the greatest crisis or suffering. This, in fact, is the essence of nonviolence. In other words, it is to change oneself first and then, through that transformation, to change the hearts of others.

From a speech at the SGI Asia Peace and Culture Conference, Okinawa, February 21, 1999.

Section 26.4: Winning People's Trust through Compassion and Wisdom

President Ikeda says that value-creating leaders need to possess the compassion and wisdom to respond with thoughtfulness, sensitivity, and flexibility to the situations and feelings of each person.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Teaching another something is the same as oiling the wheels of a cart so that they turn even though it is heavy, or as floating a boat on water so that it moves ahead easily" (WND-1, 1086). These words contain an important lesson. If you keep pushing a heavy cart without oiling the wheels, it is bound to break. A similar principle applies when trying to teach someone something.

In giving guidance, leaders must continually ask themselves: "What can I say to lift this person's spirits?" "What kind of encouragement can I offer, what can I do, to enable this person to advance joyfully?" Having this spirit of concern is crucial. There is no value in giving one-sided "guidance" that fails to take into account what the other person is thinking or feeling. If a leader rambles on endlessly when someone is hungry, or just tells someone to make greater effort when they're not feeling well, their words won't be appreciated, even by those ready and eager to do their best.

It is important to have the compassion to respond to others' needs and situations, to give considered thought to how to best help them, and then to take appropriate action. Wisdom arises from compassion.

When speaking with a young man or student, for example, rather than getting into a complex discussion, it may sometimes be more inspiring to say something like "You must be hungry. Why don't we go down to the corner and grab a bite to eat? I'll treat you." Or, when talking with a young woman who is discouraged because she is having little success in achieving her goal in an activity for kosen-rufu, you might say something like "Don't worry, I'll help you!" Encouraging people in this way can give them great peace of mind. After all, merely having the wish to contribute to kosen-rufu is in itself a wonderful thing.

We can't just give one-size-fits-all, cookie-cutter guidance. Buddhism encompasses all phenomena - the universe and everything in it. Therefore, we have to consider things from a broad and lofty perspective. We need to be flexible and use our wisdom to make everyone feel invigorated. To do so is a genuine expression of strong faith.

Leaders need to have unshakable confidence in the Mystic Law, warm sensitivity and thoughtfulness, and the ability to respond to the hearts of others with wisdom and flexibility. Without such qualities, they cannot hope to win the trust of many people or realize kosen-rufu. In contrast, the more leaders there are who possess such qualities, the more our movement for kosen-rufu will expand.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, February 24, 1996.

Section 26.5: The Organization Hinges on Its Leaders

President Ikeda stresses that the organization's development and growth depends primarily on leaders carrying out their human revolution and expanding their life state.

As kosen-rufu progresses, the organization will also grow larger. The question is whether leaders can keep pace with the increasing scale and scope of the organization.

If they don't continue to grow in tandem with its development, they will no longer be able to successfully steer the organization in a way that allows it to fulfill its true purpose - that is, as a means to help people attain happiness. Instead, the organization will succumb to the negative tendency of regarding its members as mere cogs in its machinery, as no more than a means to an end. We could say it comes down to a competition between humanity and the inclination to run things through bureaucratic structure and authority, to a tug-of-war between the inner spirit and outward form.

What is the key issue here? It is for leaders who take on responsibility for the organization's development to strive continuously to expand their state of life. In a sense, an organization will not develop beyond what its leaders' capacities allow.

The only way to improve an organization is for its leaders to study diligently, work hard, do their human revolution, and expand their state of life. They need to start by forming the causes within their own lives that lead to the growth and development of a humane organization, always returning to this fundamental principle of faith. This is a way of life that accords with the spirit of Nichiren Daishonin's Buddhism of true cause.

In every struggle for kosen-rufu, I actively took the lead and, as a result, expanded my state of life. I opened the stage for our movement so that everyone could advance with assurance and peace of mind. That's why I have constantly urged you, our youthful leaders and successors, to thoroughly train and develop yourselves.

What is the way to expand your state of life as leaders? Simply put, in addition, of course, to deepening your own faith in the Mystic Law, it lies in taking personal initiative to serve your fellow members who are striving earnestly for kosen-rufu. It is respecting and supporting them with a genuinely sincere and humble spirit, and directing your wisdom and efforts toward their happiness.

From a speech at a young men's Gajokai Academy meeting, Shizuoka, August 2, 1990.

Section 26.7: Living with Energy and Vigor

President Ikeda discusses the requirements and qualities needed by leaders in the Soka Gakkai.

Mr. Toda was always in complete earnest in the struggle for kosen-rufu. When the leaders are truly serious, the members will be, too. In such an organization, no matter how intense the struggle, everyone will share a warm spirit of mutual trust.

The central leaders' commitment and actions are paramount. In accord with the principle of "consistency from beginning to end," they determine the success or failure of that particular organizational unit as a whole.

Buddhism is strict. Our commitment in faith must be firm and true.

Self-centeredness and arrogance not only destroy one's own faith, but also that of others. Arrogance is a devilish function that destroys faith. Only by banishing arrogance can we achieve new growth and development in kosen-rufu. Please deeply engrave this in your hearts.

In particular, men need to value and respect women. Also, seniors must support their juniors and help them grow.

The higher your organizational position, the more humble and courteous you should be to others. That is what makes a person truly admirable.

The important thing is to live with energy and vigor, because that proves the benefit of our Buddhist practice. As the Daishonin indicates, "You will grow younger, and your good fortune will accumulate" (WND-1, 464).

Buddhism teaches the principle that "earthly desires lead to enlightenment." Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with fierce determination, we blast away all problems and worries!

We are living in a time of turbulent change. Everything moves at a rapid pace. The more this intensifies, the more youthful our leaders must be. Those who are passive, timid, and don't fight for kosen-rufu will quickly grow old. Strive, take action, and put your mind to work for the happiness of the members. Bravely take on challenges. That will keep you young and living longer, and it will fill your life with joy.

Winning leaders move forward confidently, with a refreshing, exuberant spirit. They speak convincingly. Their faces shine and their lives brim with vitality.

Leadership positions in the Soka Gakkai are supremely noble assignments in the struggle for kosen-rufu. The greater your responsibility, the greater the challenges you will face but also the greater the benefit you will gain. You will achieve victory as a human being, and shine and succeed in society. The experience will add something positive to your life.

Some of you have vice leadership positions. If you fail to clearly establish what your responsibilities are and don't put any real effort into fulfilling them, you will receive no benefit. What matters is whether you burn with a genuine fighting spirit for kosen-rufu. "It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 949; 1000).

If you devote yourself to faith with a pure heart, you can polish the mirror of your life so that it shines eternally.

Please continue to forge ahead on the path of kosen-rufu and leave a record of victory and success on the stage of your mission.

From a speech at a representative leaders gongyo meeting, Tokyo, September 11, 2004.

Section 26.8: Finding and Fostering Capable Individuals

President Ikeda explains that an important mission of Soka Gakkai leaders is finding capable people and then fostering those individuals to surpass them.

Both Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda put their greatest energy into fostering capable individuals.

Everything depends upon people, upon capable individuals. The Law is important, but people are key. It is people who spread the Law, and the Law enables people to flourish.

I hope, therefore, that as leaders, you will devote yourselves wholeheartedly to fostering capable individuals. Never look at your juniors as subordinates or underlings. We successfully foster the growth of others - and ourselves - when we strive with the conviction that they have even greater potential than we do, and resolve to do everything we can to help them surpass us.

Leaders need to think about how they can help everyone become happy, be successful in life, and give full play to their potential.

If we just carry out activities routinely, without that special focus, we won't be able to raise capable people. We need to consciously chant and take action toward that goal. We cannot build a full-fledged golden tower of capable individuals by simply going through the motions.

Mr. Makiguchi said that fostering capable individuals "is like trying to find gold in sand." That is very true. He praised his fellow members, saying: "You are truly gold found among sand. Yet, though you are gold, you didn't shine as gold to begin with; you were like muddy rocks. . . . Being 'found,' you now shine as splendid gold."

All people possess a golden brilliance within. As leaders, we must constantly bear this in mind and do everything possible to help them reveal their golden light.

It is important for leaders to meet with many people and take wide-ranging action, but what is the ultimate purpose of such efforts? To find gold in the form of capable individuals and foster them until they shine with their true golden brilliance. We must never forget that crucial point.

That's why Mr. Toda, inheriting Mr. Makiguchi's spirit, declared: "The Soka Gakkai must build its castle from capable people!"

"A castle of capable people" - this is our eternal guideline. To fight, win, and ceaselessly open the way forward with capable people - this is the Soka Gakkai's creed.

From this year, I am determined to put even greater energy into fostering capable individuals.

I want to foster capable people who will genuinely take action for kosen-rufu, leaders willing to work hard for the members. I want to raise world-class leaders, not self-serving individuals who sit back and let others do the hard work. Wherever I go and whatever I do, I want to train and foster such leaders.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, January 20, 1994.

Section 26.9: What Defines a Capable Person in the Soka Gakkai?

In The New Human Revolution, Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) talks about the qualities that define a capable person in the Soka Gakkai.

Talking to high school division members in Okinawa:

"I'm so happy to be able to meet all of you.

"I'm certain that from among you will emerge capable people who will shoulder the future.

"So, what defines a capable person?

"First and foremost is being aware of one's mission for kosen-rufu. Without a clear goal or an understanding of the ultimate purpose of your life, you cannot demonstrate your full potential. Also, even if you develop your ability and achieve high status and position, you cannot truly contribute to society if your only goal is personal success.

"Please understand that an awareness of your mission for kosen-rufu enables you to bring your abilities to bloom, tap into your inherent wisdom, and advance with fortitude and patience.

"A capable person is a person of character. Consideration for others, tolerance, self-discipline, and a commitment to truth and justice are just some of the qualities that mark an excellent character, the most priceless possession of a human being. Developing character requires spiritual struggle. It means forging your spirit by challenging your weaknesses and overcoming hardship after hardship.

"Also, a capable person must cultivate their abilities. You may have a pure and beautiful heart, but if you do not develop your abilities, you cannot work for peace or the happiness of others. Therefore, I hope you will find something that you can excel at. It doesn't matter what it is, but the point is that you pursue it with your whole being.

"I firmly believe that all my disciples are tremendously capable individuals. You are my treasures. You are the pride of Okinawa."

From The New Human Revolution, volume 13, "Land of Happiness" chapter.

Section 26.10: One Person of Passionate Commitment Is Stronger Than a Force of Untold Numbers

President Ikeda expresses his firm belief that what opened the way to worldwide kosen-rufu were his prayers and efforts based on a vow to protect his mentor and fellow members by taking on the brunt of all persecution.

In August 53 years ago (in 1947), I became a disciple of Josei Toda. Soon after joining the Soka Gakkai, I read the Daishonin's writing "On Practicing the Buddha's Teachings." There is one passage that says:

"Once you become a disciple or lay supporter of the votary [practitioner] who practices the true Lotus Sutra in accord with the Buddha's teachings, you are bound to face the three types of enemies (arrogant lay people, arrogant priests, and arrogant false sages). Note on terminology: The three types of enemies, also called three powerful enemies, are three types of arrogant people who persecute those who propagate the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni Buddha's death, described in the concluding verse section of the "Encouraging Devotion" chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The Great Teacher Miao-lo of China summarizes them as arrogant lay people, arrogant priests, and arrogant false sages.

Therefore, from the very day you listen to [and take faith in] this sutra, you should be fully prepared to face the great persecutions of the three types of enemies that are certain to be more horrible now after the Buddha's passing" (WND-1, 391).

As a disciple who took Mr. Toda's spirit as my own, I made the following vow: "Let me alone bear the brunt of any persecutions. Allow me to protect my mentor and all the members of the Soka Gakkai."

Over the last 53 years, I have constantly prayed and striven to fulfill that vow. It is my greatest personal pride that, while fighting fiercely against the three types of enemies predicted by the Lotus Sutra and the Daishonin's writings, I have been able to open the way for worldwide kosen-rufu, extending our movement to 163 countries and territories (192 as of 2023), without a single person losing their life to persecution.

When the Daishonin was about to be executed at Tatsunokuchi, he exclaimed: "What greater joy could there be?" (WND-1, 767). Note on terminology: The Tatsunokuchi Persecution was the failed attempt, instigated by powerful government figures, to behead the Daishonin under the cover of darkness on the beach at Tatsunokuchi, on the outskirts of Kamakura, on September 12, 1271.

And when he was exiled to Sado, he declared: "Because I view things this way, I feel immeasurable delight even though I am now an exile" (WND-1, 386). Note on terminology: The Sado Exile was the Daishonin's exile to Sado Island off the western coast of Japan from October 1271 - immediately following the Tatsunokuchi Persecution on September 12, 1271 - through March 1274.

In life and in the struggle for kosen-rufu, all our sufferings and earthly desires are fuel for our enlightenment. The tougher the challenges we face, the greater the joy and benefit and the higher the life condition we will ultimately savor.

It's important for leaders to resolve to work harder than anyone. They should also keep striving and live their lives cheerfully and confidently, determined to enjoy themselves more than anyone. People with such resolve are invincible; no one can match them. One person of passionate commitment is stronger than a force of untold numbers.

The outcome of a struggle is decided by the leaders' determination, by their sense of responsibility.

The members in the early days of the Soka Gakkai rose up with a spirit of absolute determination to triumph and achieve kosen-rufu in their communities. If you have that determination, capable people will appear and join you in realizing that goal. Your resolve will also be communicated to the Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the universe, who will respond to your dedication. In other words, resolute prayer is the key. And just as the fields burst into flower when spring comes, all of your efforts, too, will blossom without fail when the right time comes.

From a speech at a Japan-Italy representatives conference, Gunma, August 11, 2000.

Section 26.11: Leadership Positions in the Soka Gakkai Are Positions of Responsibility

President Ikeda expresses his appreciation to members who made the journey to attend a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting in spite of difficult travel conditions caused by record snowfalls.

From the end of last year, many areas around Japan, particularly Hokkaido, Tohoku, Shin'etsu, Hokuriku, and Chugoku, have experienced record snowfalls. To all our members battling heavy snows in places such as Akita, Niigata, and Fukui prefectures, please know that my prayers and thoughts are with you. My deepest appreciation also to everyone who has traveled here despite many snow-related delays and inconveniences. I know that it has taken our Akita Prefecture women's division leader, who runs a bakery, two whole days to get here. I have heard of many other similar cases.

Twenty-four hours a day, I receive an unending stream of reports on matters, big and small, concerning our members. If there has been a traffic accident, I know where it's happened. I know who's in hospital at the present moment and what condition they are in. Reports pour in from morning until night. Many times, a report has prompted me to jump out of bed in the middle of the night to chant.

Leadership positions in the Soka Gakkai have nothing to do with status or rank like those found in society. Genuine Soka Gakkai leaders are those who fulfill every task before them with a solemn sense of responsibility, working single-mindedly for the welfare of the members and for kosen-rufu. This is something that must never, ever be forgotten.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Concerned about my life in the mountains, you had your messenger make his way through the snow to call on me. Your sincerity has no doubt been recognized by the Lotus Sutra and the ten demon daughters" (WND-1, 891). Note on terminology: The ten demon daughters are the 10 female protective deities who appear in the "Dharani" chapter of the Lotus Sutra as the "daughters of rakshasa demons" or the "ten rakshasa daughters." They vow to the Buddha to guard and protect the sutra's practitioners.

When I heard about the damage caused by the heavy snowfalls, I immediately thought of this passage.

Making one's way through the snow for the sake of the Mystic Law - taken in the broadest sense in terms of our activities for kosen-rufu today, this corresponds to our earnest efforts to offer guidance and encouragement, to share the teachings of Buddhism with others, and to be diligent in organizational communications and reporting.

The Daishonin highly praises such dedication, telling the letter's recipient that he appreciates his sincerity and pure intent. In the same way, the Daishonin is surely applauding all of you most heartily for your devoted efforts. Your benefit is beyond measure.

Naturally, I don't want any of you to overexert yourselves or put yourselves at risk. I ask our leaders not to place unreasonable demands on members, but to always give foremost priority to everyone's health and safety.

I am praying with all my heart for the safety and well-being of everyone living in heavy snowfall areas.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, January 6, 2006.

Section 26.12: The Foremost Message of the Buddha

President Ikeda declares that the foremost message that Shakyamuni and Nichiren Daishonin wished to convey to us is to respect our fellow Buddhist practitioners and our fellow human beings.

Your selfless, unsparing, and tireless efforts for the sake of your fellow members, sincere practitioners of Buddhism, and for kosen-rufu are incredibly noble. The essence of the Lotus Sutra and the fundamental spirit of Nichiren Buddhism pulse vibrantly in such actions to protect and care for others.

This is the final message that Shakyamuni taught in the 28 chapters of the Lotus Sutra: Treat those who uphold the sutra as if they are Buddhas.

I am referring to the passage from the "Encouragements of the Bodhisattva Universal Worthy" chapter of the Lotus Sutra in which Shakyamuni tells Bodhisattva Universal Worthy: "If you see a person who accepts and upholds this sutra, you should rise and greet him from afar, showing him the same respect you would a Buddha" (LSOC28, 365).

This is the very last teaching Shakyamuni shares in the Lotus Sutra. It is also a passage that we of the Soka Gakkai have been putting into practice in our own lives.

The fundamental attitude of Soka Gakkai leaders must always be to value their fellow members to the highest degree and serve them sincerely. This spirit is what has enabled the Soka Gakkai to grow to the extent it has. Putting the members first is the Soka Gakkai's eternal and unchanging spirit.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin comments on that sutra passage as follows:

"In this chapter Shakyamuni Buddha revealed the foremost point he wished to convey to us. The Buddha preached the Lotus Sutra over a period of eight years, and eight characters sum up the message that he has left behind for living beings in this later age, the Latter Day of the Law. It is in the passage that reads, 'Therefore, Universal Worthy, if you see a person who accepts and upholds this sutra, you should rise and greet him from afar, showing him the same respect you would a Buddha' (LSOC28, 365), particularly the eight characters that make up the end of the passage, 'you should rise and greet him,' etc. With this passage the words of Shakyamuni Buddha in the sutra come to an end, thus in effect ending the sutra.

The word 'should' shows that these words refer to the future. The words 'should rise and greet him from afar' indicate that the sutra passage is saying that one should without fail show the practitioners of the Lotus Sutra the kind of respect one would show to a Buddha" (OTT, 192-93).

We need to respect and value most highly those who embrace the Mystic Law. That is the "foremost point [the Buddha] wished to convey to us." The word "should" (in the phrase "you should rise and greet him from afar") refers to the future, the Latter Day of the Law in which we are living at present. In a specific sense, the "practitioners of the Lotus Sutra" refers to Nichiren Daishonin, but in a general sense, it refers to all his disciples dedicated to kosen-rufu in the Latter Day.

Respect the practitioners of Buddhism, respect all human beings - this is the foremost message the Buddha seeks to convey. We of the Soka Gakkai are inspired by, are grateful for, and fully embrace this humanism, this love of humanity, that pulses vibrantly in the teachings of Shakyamuni and Nichiren Daishonin. Let us vow together to advance forever in perfect accord with this message.

From a speech at a Toshima, Bunkyo, and Taito wards culture and music festival, Tokyo, December 21, 1991.
