Chapter 15: "Faith for Overcoming Obstacles"

Section 15.1: Adversity as a Source of Pride

President Ikeda once said: "Happiness isn't the absence of problems. A life without problems is empty and uneventful. It offers no opportunity for achieving human revolution or changing one's karma. Inner joy and true happiness are found in enduring and overcoming adversity. This is the foundation of Nichiren Buddhism. Those who surmount hardships and adversity become Buddhas."

Encountering adversity in the course of our Buddhist practice—whether a problem in daily life or a challenge in the realm of faith—is proof that we are making significant progress in our human revolution and efforts to transform our karma. As such, hardships are badges of honor for practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism.

This chapter features President Ikeda's guidance relating to "faith for overcoming obstacles," one of the five eternal guidelines of the Soka Gakkai.

Note on the five eternal guidelines: President Ikeda has set forth five eternal guidelines for the Soka Gakkai: (1) Faith for a harmonious family, (2) Faith for achieving happiness, (3) Faith for overcoming obstacles, (4) Faith for health and long life, and (5) Faith for absolute victory.

In this first selection, he explains the significance of hardships we encounter in faith, especially in our youth.

My mentor, second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda, always encouraged young people to read books, especially famous works of literature. He sternly reprimanded those who didn't. If he discovered us reading magazines of no positive value, he would erupt in anger.

I remember eagerly reading in my youth the writings of Eiji Yoshikawa, author of such historical novels as The Three Kingdoms and Miyamoto Musashi.

Yoshikawa once said to a young man of privilege: "You are an unfortunate youth. For there is no greater misfortune than seeing too much beauty and partaking of too much fine cuisine from an early age. It is sad to see a young person's sensitivity"—his ability to perceive joy as joy—"become dulled."

These words have remained with me all my life.

Those who, in the all-important years for laying the foundation of their lives, are blessed with every possible comfort, are coddled and pampered, lack nothing, or never experience any hardships, are not by any means happy or fortunate. They are in fact the most unfortunate. There is no way they will grow into great individuals.

The absence of hardship is not happiness. True happiness and joy in life are found in not being defeated by hardship, by picking ourselves up again when we fall down, by weathering and triumphing over adversity.

Life is a battle.

Life is a challenge.

Life is training.

Difficulties are an inescapable part of life. Our practice of Nichiren Buddhism empowers us to build a strong self that can bravely face every trial we encounter, enabling us to challenge the situation with a positive spirit and see it as a chance for growth. Those who have this fighting spirit win in the end.

From a speech at a joint training session for SGI-Brazil women's division leaders and Tohoku, Hokuriku, and Shin'etsu representatives, Nagano, August 21, 2004.

Section 15.3: Do Not Succumb to the "Eight Winds"

Buddhism teaches of the "eight winds," or eight influences, that can obstruct our Buddhist practice. A bodhisattva is able to view these phenomena as obstacles and, undisturbed by them, persevere with steadfast faith.

The higher a mountain, the stronger the winds that buffet it. The peaks of the Himalayas, the king of all mountain ranges, are constantly pounded by violent winds. According to weather data, winter temperatures in the Himalayas may drop to as low as minus 40 degrees Celsius (minus 40 degrees Fahrenheit) and relentless icy gales sometimes reach speeds of more than 100 meters per second (224 miles per hour). But in even the strongest wind, the "king of mountain ranges" towers with majestic dignity and imperturbable calm.

Buddhism teaches that we should live our lives with the perfect serenity and composure of the Himalayas, not bending in the least before the eight winds, which might otherwise extinguish the flame of our Buddhist practice. In his writing "The Eight Winds," Nichiren Daishonin states:

"Worthy [wise] persons deserve to be called so because they are not carried away by the eight winds: prosperity, decline, disgrace, honor, praise, censure, suffering, and pleasure. They are neither elated by prosperity nor grieved by decline. The heavenly gods will surely protect one who is unbending before the eight winds." (WND-1, 796)

The eight winds consist of four favorable winds and four unfavorable winds. The first four, which people generally favor and tend to seek, are (1) prosperity (profit of various kinds), (2) honor (accolades from society), (3) praise (admiration from people), and (4) pleasure (physical and spiritual gratification). The remaining four, which people on the whole find disagreeable and tend to shun, are (5) decline (loss of various kinds), (6) disgrace (being dishonored and humiliated by others), (7) censure (being criticized or disparaged), and (8) suffering. Buddhism teaches that we must not allow ourselves to be swayed by the eight winds and let them cause us to abandon our Buddhist practice.

One Buddhist scripture, the Brahma Excellent Thought Sutra, states that the mind of a bodhisattva who does not succumb to the eight winds is "as firm and unmoving as Mount Sumeru."

Note on terminology: Mount Sumeru, in ancient Indian cosmology, is the mountain that stands at the center of the world.

Bodhisattvas are courageous individuals who plunge headlong into the very thick of society to lead others to happiness. What kind of character should bodhisattvas possess? Shakyamuni asserts that they should have hearts that are invulnerable to assaults from the eight winds.

This perfectly describes the members of the Soka Gakkai. We do not hold discussion meetings or carry out Soka Gakkai activities for the sake of self-interest or material gain, nor is there someone constantly at our side praising our efforts. On the contrary, we are often subjected to unjust criticism and abuse from people in society and have a hard time because of it. Despite this, all of you continue to take action for the happiness of others, for Buddhism, and for society. Your conduct is truly that of noble bodhisattvas of the present age.

The Daishonin warns against succumbing to the eight winds, stating that those who can remain unaffected by them are not only wise, but will receive the protection of the heavenly deities, the positive forces of the universe.

Why is it that, in the face of an endless onslaught of attacks, the Soka Gakkai has managed to achieve such remarkable development in Japan and around the globe? It is because all of you have persevered with sincere, steadfast faith, unswayed by the eight winds, just as the Daishonin teaches. That is why we have been thoroughly protected by the heavenly deities.

President Toda said: "We should be neither elated by praise nor alarmed by insults. It is important that our faith be unwavering."

Refusing to be swayed by any of the eight winds, let us continue to build an even more majestic and dignified mountain of the Soka Gakkai that will last for all eternity. Let us make it as lofty and grand as that king of mountain ranges, the peerless Himalayas!

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, January 27, 1996.

Section 15.4: There Is No Hardship We Cannot Surmount

With strong faith, President Ikeda says, we can overcome any hardship, transforming it into an opportunity to open up the life state of Buddhahood within us.

Explaining the principle that strong faith leads to strong protection by the positive forces of the universe, Nichiren Daishonin writes:

"I say this for your sake. I know your faith has always been admirable, but now you must strengthen it more than ever. Only then will the ten demon daughters [protective deities in Buddhism] lend you even greater protection." (WND-1, 614)

Note on terminology: The ten demon daughters are the ten female protective deities who appear in the "Dharani" (26th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra as the "daughters of rakshasa demons" or the "ten rakshasa daughters." They vow to the Buddha to guard and protect the sutra's practitioners.

However hard we may have exerted ourselves in the past, the important thing is how we challenge ourselves from now on. We need to rouse even stronger faith than we have before. The heavenly deities, or benevolent functions of the universe, will protect us if we do. The appearance of the three powerful enemies and the three obstacles and four devils—of any kind of hardship—is simply a test of our faith, all necessary for us to bring forth the life state of Buddhahood.

Note on terminology: The three powerful enemies are three types of arrogant people who persecute those who propagate the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni Buddha's death, described in the concluding verse section of the "Encouraging Devotion" (13th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The Great Teacher Miao-lo of China summarizes them as arrogant lay people, arrogant priests, and arrogant false sages. The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are (1) the obstacle of earthly desires, (2) the obstacle of karma, and (3) the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are (1) the hindrance of the five components, (2) the hindrance of earthly desires, (3) the hindrance of death, and (4) the hindrance of the devil king.

That's why strengthening our faith even further is the way to overcome hardships and to triumph. As long as we have strong faith, there is no hardship we cannot overcome. As the Daishonin states: "Since [we] believe solely in the Lotus Sutra . . . [we] can enter the treasure tower of the Gohonzon" (cf. WND-1, 832). Embracing the Gohonzon of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and striving to realize kosen-rufu enables us to enter the realm of Buddhahood that is the palace of happiness within our lives, wherever we are and whatever our circumstances. We have no reason to worry and nothing to fear.

The Daishonin writes: "No matter how many terrible enemies you may encounter, banish all fears and never think of backsliding" (WND-1, 395).

Please engrave deep in your hearts the Daishonin's words that we should have no fear and never discard our faith.

From a speech at a representative leaders training session, Nagano, August 16, 2005.

Section 15.5: Never Stop Practicing!

In a message to the young women's division SGI Ikeda Kayo-kai, President Ikeda stressed three points: (1) Illuminate these troubled times with the bright sun of the Kayo-kai; (2) Strive in your own way to open new creative paths to a culture of peace; and (3) With an invincible smile, never stop practicing Buddhism as long as you live. In discussing the third point, he explained that unwavering resolve is the essence of "faith for overcoming obstacles."

I would like to say to you: With an invincible smile, never stop practicing Buddhism as long as you live!

In 1979, when the Soka Gakkai was in the midst of a harsh spate of persecutions, my wife, Kaneko, continued to strive in activities for kosen-rufu with an imperturbable smile. At one discussion meeting during that time, a member asked her to inscribe something on a decorative card, and she wrote: "Never stop practicing."

The shared vow of mentor and disciple is to keep practicing Nichiren Buddhism together with the Soka Gakkai throughout one's life, no matter what happens.

You are all Bodhisattvas of the Earth, possessing wondrous karmic bonds, who have emerged in your respective places of mission at this significant time.

Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

Having such a great mission means that the challenges you face will also be great. But that is why you will be able to savor a truly rare and irreplaceable sense of fulfillment in your lives and accumulate indelible good fortune.

Whatever the situation, decide that you will not be defeated and keep moving forward with vigor and optimism, leading a youth of unsurpassed joy.

The Daishonin writes: "To have faith like water means to believe continuously without ever regressing" (WND-1, 899). In accord with these words, I hope you will lead vibrant and victorious lives of steadfast faith, free of regret.

From a message to an SGI Ikeda Kayo-kai general meeting, Tokyo, September 5, 2013.

Section 15.6: Human Revolution Takes Place amid Our Struggles with Difficulties

We encounter obstacles precisely because we are practicing Buddhism correctly. When we dauntlessly tackle those obstacles, we can attain a vast life state of genuine peace and ease.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin comments on the "Peaceful Practices" (14th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra: "Concerning the 'peaceful' practices of the Lotus Sutra of the Wonderful Law and the practices carried out by Nichiren and his followers now in the Latter Day of the Law, you should understand that, when one practices the Lotus Sutra under such circumstances, difficulties will arise, and these are to be looked on as [peace and comfort]" (cf. OTT, 115).

"Peace and comfort" are not usually the words that come to mind when we encounter difficulties or suffering. Normally, we would think of "peace and comfort" as being found amid tranquil and secure circumstances. But that is not the source of true "peace and comfort."

When we strive in Buddhist practice for the sake of the happiness of ourselves and others in the Latter Day of the Law, obstacles are certain to arise. True peace and comfort are attained by facing obstacles and challenging hardships head-on. Experiencing difficulties is proof that we are making great efforts to persevere in faith.

When a boat sets out on a long journey, it is bound to encounter fierce storms and powerful waves. But unless it weathers them and presses on, it cannot reach the "harbor" of its destination.

For us, the harbor we aim for is Buddhahood. If we fear the storms of hardship and the raging waves of difficulty we may encounter along the way, we cannot reach our goal of Buddhahood.

In short, faith is a battle between the Buddha and devilish functions, and the only way to realize true peace and comfort is to develop, through that struggle, a strong life state that will not be defeated by difficulties.

What I would like you to bear deeply in mind is that a state of absolute peace and comfort that no obstacle can destroy comes from establishing strong faith that can withstand any adversity.

In the long course of your lives, you may experience setbacks or failures. But I hope you will never allow yourselves to be discouraged or defeated. Live out your lives as lion kings! Faith means to have unflagging hope. May each of you always forge ahead with courage and wisdom as you strive to fulfill the great vow for kosen-rufu.

From a speech at a Hyogo Prefecture representative leaders meeting, Hyogo, April 18, 1987.

Section 15.7: Obstacles Enable Us to Polish Our Lives

Stressing that hardships and obstacles enable us to polish our lives, President Ikeda explains that the very circumstances that trouble us help us reveal our Buddhahood.

Obstacles enable us to polish our lives.

In one of his writings, the Daishonin employs the following simile: "It will only be like a boar rubbing against the golden mountain" (WND-1, 770).

The story behind this simile goes something like this: Once there was a golden mountain. A boar came upon it and didn't like the fact that the mountain glittered brightly. It tried to erase the golden mountain's brilliance by rubbing against it. The boar's coat was stiff, and he rubbed very hard. But what was the result? The harder the boar rubbed against the mountain, the brighter it shone.

This simile appears in The Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom and in Great Concentration and Insight. The Daishonin refers to it to teach us that the more that practitioners of the Lotus Sutra encounter obstacles, the brighter their lives shine.

The obstacles in question are the three obstacles and four devils. We cannot attain enlightenment without struggling against them. We cannot become Buddhas without experiencing and overcoming difficulties—just as we cannot graduate from university without taking examinations and passing them.

The Daishonin writes: "This world is the domain of the devil king of the sixth heaven" (WND-1, 495). As a result, good people are harassed and evil people do what they like. Kosen-rufu is a movement to fundamentally transform this upside-down state of affairs.

Note on terminology: The devil king of the sixth heaven, also called the devil king or heavenly devil, is the king of devils, who dwells in the highest or the sixth heaven of the world of desire. He is also named Freely Enjoying Things Conjured by Others, the king who makes free use of the fruits of others' efforts for his own pleasure. Served by innumerable minions, he obstructs Buddhist practice and delights in sapping the life force of other beings, the manifestation of the fundamental ignorance inherent in life. The devil king is a personification of the negative tendency to force others to one's will at any cost.

To shine ever more brightly the more obstacles we face—this also provides an important lesson in the area of human relations.

An organization is a gathering of all kinds of individuals. There may be some who are not easy to work with. Sometimes, the behavior of others may really annoy or upset us. But such things make the golden mountain of our lives shine.

If everyone in our lives was perfect, we would never grow. Working together with people we may not get along well with is a way to polish our "golden mountain."

Quite frankly, we ourselves may not always behave as admirably as we'd like, so how can we expect others to behave just as we want them to? Getting upset at each little incident doesn't improve anything, nor does it change the other person. Sometimes you just have to sigh and think, "Well, that's the way he is," and accept the other person with compassion.

The Daishonin writes: "The fifth volume of [T'ien-t'ai's] Great Concentration and Insight states, '. . . like the various rivers flowing into the sea; like logs making a fire burn more briskly'" (WND-1, 770).

T'ien-t'ai is saying that the reason the sea is so vast is that many different rivers flow into it, and the sea accepts them all.

If the sea rejected one river or another, it wouldn't be the great, vast sea it is. If we reject and avoid people we don't like, we can't develop a self that is as vast and expansive as the ocean.

T'ien-t'ai also says that the more logs we add to a fire, the more briskly it burns.

The logs of unhappiness fuel the flames of happiness. Because we experience hardships, we can know joy. Buddhism teaches that the sufferings of earthly desires lead to enlightenment. Problems enable us to grow. That's why there is no such thing as unalloyed or unremitting happiness.

The Daishonin even says that Hei no Saemon-no-jo and others who had persecuted him are his "foremost good friends" and "best allies" (cf. WND-1, 770). Those who give us the hardest time are those who, more than anyone else, help us attain Buddhahood.

From a speech at a women's division representatives conference, Tokyo, January 25, 1998.

Section 15.8: "An Impasse Is a Critical Turning Point"

Reflecting on his own history of striving together with his mentor, President Ikeda explains that we can bring forth great underlying strength when we struggle through adversity.

In 1950, my mentor Josei Toda's businesses were in crisis. The situation was so dire that Mr. Toda even stepped down from his position as Soka Gakkai general director [to protect the organization from being embroiled in his business problems]. He was unable to pay his employees, who quit one after another, until I was left as his sole support.

Mr. Toda was a great leader of kosen-rufu. Firmly convinced that protecting him was the equivalent of protecting the Soka Gakkai and the heritage of faith of Nichiren Buddhism, I did everything I possibly could to assist and support him.

One day, Mr. Toda and I were on our way to Omiya City in Saitama Prefecture, hoping to gain the financial means to break through the impasse that Mr. Toda's businesses were facing. Unfortunately, our effort did not meet with success.

On the way back, we walked along the banks of the Arakawa River in Omiya. The night wind was cold. The stars above were beautiful, shining down upon the two of us, mentor and disciple, who had failed in our attempt that day.

The laces of my worn shoes, which had several holes, came undone. As I retied them, I began singing a popular song, hoping to cheer Mr. Toda up.

I humorously changed the lyric, "In the flow of the stars . . . , who turned me into this kind of woman" into "In the flow of the stars . . . , who turned me into this kind of man?"

With a smile, Mr. Toda swiftly rejoined: "I did!"

In the midst of a genuinely desperate situation, he retained his sense of humor.

I was relieved. In fact, I was happy. As long as Mr. Toda was alive and well, there was nothing to fear. Rather, knowing this inspired me, his disciple, to keep fighting my hardest, to carry on the struggle until we had won.

That unforgettable moment, that drama of mentor and disciple—a pivotal event unfolding under the starry skies of Saitama—remains indelibly etched in my heart to this day.

Mr. Toda would often say to me: "An impasse is a critical turning point. Do you give up and throw in the towel? Or do you stand up with indomitable resolve, determined to go on fighting? That difference in attitude is what determines victory or defeat." Mr. Toda deeply and firmly impressed this lesson on me.

"Listen to me, Daisaku. Whatever happens along the way, triumph in the end! Resolve to win! If you win in the end, you will have won in everything."

My days back then were a continuous, intense struggle. I had no time for self-pity. I knew in the depths of my being that an eternal, ever-victorious, indestructible bastion was being built within me as I strove tirelessly to support my mentor with the spirit of exerting millions of eons of effort (cf. OTT, 214).

From the resonance of our spirits as mentor and disciple and in the light of the uncompromising law of cause and effect taught in Buddhism—I was strongly convinced that I would experience brilliant future reward.

Eventually, we made our way through this raging storm of troubles [relating to Mr. Toda's business problems], and on May 3 the following year, the morning of victory dawned as Mr. Toda was inaugurated as the second Soka Gakkai president.

It is only when we struggle against adversity that the tremendous power residing in the very depths of our lives begins to reveal itself. Those who can summon great strength at the most challenging time are victors. This is an unchanging rule of history.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, December 6, 2003.

Section 15.9: The Stronger One's Faith, the Greater One's Joy

President Ikeda shares passages from Nichiren Daishonin's writings that he has taken to heart since his youth, and calls upon us to have strong faith and rejoice in adversity.

"A Ship to Cross the Sea of Suffering" is one of the writings of Nichiren Daishonin that I engraved so deeply in my life as a youth that I could recite it by heart.

In it, the Daishonin writes: "In the Latter Day of the Law, the votary of the Lotus Sutra will appear without fail. The greater the hardships befalling him, the greater the delight he feels, because of his strong faith. Doesn't a fire burn more briskly when logs are added?" (WND-1, 33). Here, he states that the votary of the Lotus Sutra is destined to appear in the Latter Day of the Law, with the implicit message that it is he who is fulfilling this prediction. Hardships will befall the votary, he notes, but that is precisely the time to rouse even stronger faith and relish the challenge of overcoming them.

The votary of the Lotus Sutra welcomes hardships, eagerly awaits them, and then rises joyfully to challenge them. True, courageous Bodhisattvas of the Earth do not react to a little criticism by feeling sad, whining, doubting, or complaining.

The Daishonin likens rousing even stronger faith when we encounter hardships to a fire burning more brightly when logs are added. But if a fire is small, it won't be able to burn the logs; adding them would only extinguish it.

He also writes, describing the votary's vast and encompassing life state: "All rivers flow into the sea, but does the sea turn back their waters? The currents of hardship pour into the sea of the Lotus Sutra and rush against its votary. The river is not rejected by the ocean; nor does the votary reject suffering" (WND-1, 33).

Those who feel rising joy when they face great hardships are true votaries of the Lotus Sutra who are like the sea. They possess within them the infinitely vast ocean of a fearless, unshakable, and all-embracing state of life.

Next, the Daishonin writes: "Were it not for the flowing rivers, there would be no sea. Likewise, without tribulation there would be no votary of the Lotus Sutra" (WND-1, 33).

Whatever difficulties we may encounter, they are nothing compared to those experienced by the Daishonin. Moreover, the hardships we undergo in the course of our Buddhist practice all contribute to helping us transform our karma. They ultimately have profound meaning for our lives. They are all nourishment for our development, for leading brilliant, worthwhile lives. They are the driving force that propels us toward lives of towering victory.

This is the great privilege that you, my friends who embrace the Mystic Law, enjoy, and a truth that you should devote your lives to demonstrating.

From a speech at a representative leaders meeting commemorating the 40th anniversary of kosen-rufu in Izu, Shizuoka, November 23, 1987.

Section 15.10: Not Giving In to Doubt When Difficulties Arise

Referring to an important passage from Nichiren Daishonin's writing "The Opening of the Eyes," President Ikeda explains that the life state of Buddhahood is attained by facing and overcoming obstacles through faith.

Let's examine a passage from Nichiren Daishonin's writing "The Opening of the Eyes":

"Although I and my disciples may encounter various difficulties, if we do not harbor doubts in our hearts, we will as a matter of course attain Buddhahood. Do not have doubts simply because heaven does not lend you protection. Do not be discouraged because you do not enjoy an easy and secure existence in this life. This is what I have taught my disciples morning and evening, and yet they begin to harbor doubts and abandon their faith. Foolish men are likely to forget the promises they have made when the crucial moment comes." (WND-1, 283)

If you remember this, you'll be fine. Please never forget this teaching.

Those who keep on striving, never doubting the power of faith even when difficulties arise, are certain to attain Buddhahood, the Daishonin assures us.

I know that many of you have memorized this passage, and that it has been placed on the Buddhist altar in many households. It is one of the most fundamental of the Daishonin's teachings.

Difficulties are inescapable. "No one can avoid problems, not even sages or worthies" (WND-1, 681), says the Daishonin.

Since we cannot avoid them, we must overcome them. We must overcome them and attain Buddhahood.

In "Letter from Sado," the Daishonin writes: "Iron, when heated in the flames and pounded, becomes a fine sword. Worthies and sages are tested by abuse" (WND-1, 303). Swords are tempered in fire. That's the only way to make a sword.

In the same way, those who are tempered by criticism and abuse, by opposition and attack, become true "sages and worthies."

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, September 29, 1994.

Section 15.11: Difficulties Are Opportunities for Transforming Our Karma

President Ikeda explains the Buddhist principle of "changing poison into medicine" and urges us to view difficulties as opportunities for transforming our karma.

Do we allow difficulties to overwhelm us, or do we fight back and triumph over them? That is the crux of our struggle both as individuals and societies.

The Buddhist principle of "changing poison into medicine" opened the way for all people to enact joyous dramas of inner transformation. Not only could they surmount the hardships confronting them, but also dramatically transform adverse circumstances and elevate their life state to new heights.

Note on terminology: "Changing poison into medicine" is the principle that earthly desires and suffering can be transformed into benefit and enlightenment by virtue of the power of the Mystic Law. This phrase is found in a passage from The Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom, which mentions "a great physician who can change poison into medicine."

Referring to The Treatise on the Great Perfection of Wisdom and T'ien-t'ai's Profound Meaning of the Lotus Sutra, Nichiren Daishonin declared for the sake of all people living in the corrupt age of the Latter Day of the Law: "What does it mean to change poison into medicine? It means to transform the three paths [of earthly desires, karma, and suffering] into the three virtues: the Dharma body, wisdom, and emancipation" (WND-2, 743).

Note on terminology: The three paths of earthly desires, karma, and suffering are called "paths" because one leads to the other. Earthly desires, which include greed, anger, foolishness, arrogance, and doubt, give rise to actions that create evil karma. The effect of this evil karma then manifests itself as suffering. Suffering aggravates earthly desires, leading to further misguided action, which in turn brings on more evil karma and suffering. The three virtues of the Dharma body, wisdom, and emancipation are three attributes of a Buddha. The Dharma body means the truth that the Buddha has realized, or the true aspect of all phenomena; wisdom is the capacity to realize this truth; and emancipation means the state of being free from the sufferings of birth and death.

In other words, the supreme power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to transform any deluded impulse, any karma, and any suffering into Buddhahood, wisdom, and benefit. There is no negative karma that we cannot change. This fact is a brilliant source of hope, so we need not lament or despair.

The two Ikegami brothers endured their father disinheriting the elder brother on account of their faith in the Lotus Sutra. Shijo Kingo, meanwhile, faced the prospect of having his estates confiscated by his lord. The lies and scheming of malicious priests lay behind both these developments, which, in the feudal society of the day, threatened the very livelihoods of these disciples.

The Daishonin, however, advised the Ikegami brothers: "You must persevere through this trial and see for yourselves the blessings of the Lotus Sutra" (WND-1, 498). And he encouraged Shijo Kingo: "Great disaster without fail changes into great fortune" (WND-1, 824).

Moving beyond questions of whether the disinheritance would be rescinded or the estates restored, the Daishonin revealed the path leading directly from the worst possible situation to the highest peak of victory.

The Ikegami brothers followed the Daishonin's advice, and in the end, they succeeded in overcoming their father's fierce opposition. They eventually even converted him to the Daishonin's teachings and managed to establish family harmony that would lead to lasting prosperity.

Shijo Kingo, too, demonstrated undeniable proof of the power of faith. He overcame his lord's prejudice and won his support and understanding. In addition, he came to earn praise throughout Kamakura, with people declaring: "No one can compare to Nakatsukasa Saemon-no-jo [Shijo Kingo]" and "Ah, there's a fine fellow . . . !" (WND-2, 730).

In the northern regions of Japan, after the bitter cold of winter, spring explodes onto the scene. Similarly, disciples who persevere through the harshest winters of life with courageous faith, in the same spirit as their mentor, will savor a bright springtime of victory beyond their imagination. That is the ultimate meaning of "changing poison into medicine."

President Toda encouraged a member who was struggling with problems: "Rejoice when you encounter hardships! It is the time to demonstrate the power of faith. It is an opportunity to transform your karma. Buddhism teaches the infallible Law of 'changing poison into medicine.' You can regain any losses tenfold or a hundredfold in the form of great benefit."

It has been the painful fate of human society, plagued and terrorized by the world's many poisons, to be trapped in an endless cycle of misfortune and confusion. Our Soka movement is dedicated to spreading the humanistic principles of Nichiren Buddhism for the peace and prosperity of all humanity. As such, it is engaged in a fearless struggle to change all poison into medicine, freely creating value out of everything for the sake of human happiness, protecting the sanctity of life, and world peace.

From an editorial titled "The Joyous Drama of Changing Poison into Medicine," published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, April 2010.

Section 15.12: A Buddha Is One Who Continues Striving

President Ikeda discusses the important defining qualities of a Buddha and how Shakyamuni attained Buddhahood.

Those who continue to strive and overcome hardships will attain Buddhahood. This is a very important point.

What is a Buddha? And how did Shakyamuni attain Buddhahood?

Hajime Nakamura, a leading scholar of Buddhism, has this to say on the subject: "Even after becoming a Buddha (an 'enlightened one'), Shakyamuni remained a human being."

Even after attaining Buddhahood, Shakyamuni still experienced pain and suffering. He knew illness. He continued to be tempted by negative influences or impulses.

Professor Nakamura continues: "The essence of Buddhahood, then, must be identified as the practice of rejecting temptation. Unceasing, assiduous effort is itself the practice of the Buddha. When one attains enlightenment, one does not become some different kind of being called a 'Buddha.'"

The "temptation" of which Professor Nakamura speaks here refers to negative influences or impulses and bad friends. They are the forces that obstruct Buddhist practice, lead to unhappiness, destroy the harmonious unity of believers, and tempt us to abandon our faith.

The person who wages an unceasing battle against such devilish influences and continuously acts to lead others to happiness is a Buddha. A Buddha is not some special sort of being. The person who keeps striving bravely in both spirit and action, who keeps up the battle against negative forces until it is won—that person is a Buddha.

Shakyamuni's attainment of enlightenment under the bodhi tree in ancient India and Nichiren Daishonin's act of casting off his transient status and revealing his true identity as the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law at the time of the Tatsunokuchi Persecution are both expressions of the highest state of humanity. Neither Shakyamuni nor the Daishonin ceased to be human. The essential truth of Buddhism is that ordinary people can attain the ultimate state of Buddhahood as they are.

Note on terminology: The Tatsunokuchi Persecution was the failed attempt, instigated by powerful government figures, to behead the Daishonin under the cover of darkness on the beach at Tatsunokuchi, on the outskirts of Kamakura, on September 12, 1271.

It is in the faith of those who exert themselves in their Buddhist practice and actively make efforts to realize kosen-rufu that Buddhahood reveals itself.

Today, all of you are striving in Soka Gakkai activities, taking on the sufferings of many people as your own sufferings. This is truly the noble behavior of Buddhas.

Nichiren Daishonin declares that one who perseveres through great hardships and embraces the Lotus Sutra from beginning to end is an emissary of the Buddha (cf. WND-1, 942).

As long as we devote ourselves to the cause of kosen-rufu, we are sure to encounter obstacles. But it is these very obstacles that enable us to strengthen our faith and forge the state of Buddhahood within us.

From a speech at a Tohoku Region general meeting, Tokyo, March 21, 1994.

Section 15.13: President Makiguchi's Noble Struggle

President Ikeda explains the key to developing "faith for overcoming obstacles" by referring to the example of first Soka Gakkai president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi during his struggle in prison, the starting point of the Soka Gakkai.

In 1944, President Makiguchi spent what was to be his last New Year's Day in his cramped solitary cell in the Tokyo Detention Center. There was one hard straw mat, and the rest of the floor was wood. He had no heating. He had no Gohonzon. That January, Mr. Makiguchi wrote several letters to his family from this cold, spartan prison cell.

In one dated January 7, he wrote: "I am fine, Sadako. I have greeted my 74th New Year's here. For the three days of the New Year holiday we received pounded rice cakes and other delicious treats. Please take care of the family, and don't worry about me."

Note on names: Sadako refers to the wife of Mr. Makiguchi's third son, Yozo, who died in the war just prior to Mr. Makiguchi's death.

In 1944, Mr. Makiguchi would become 74 years old according to the traditional Japanese custom counting a person's age as one year from the day of birth. [He, in fact, turned 73 that year, according to the Western way of calculating age.]

Incidentally, Nichimoku Shonin was also 74 when he died on his way to remonstrate with the government authorities.

Note on Nichimoku Shonin: In May 1333, the Kamakura military government fell and power reverted to the imperial court in Kyoto. Nichimoku, Nikko's successor, resolved to remonstrate with the new authorities and urge them to accept the teachings of Nichiren Daishonin. In the November that year, he set out for Kyoto accompanied by two disciples, but died along the way.

Mr. Makiguchi calls the plain prison fare "delicious." The amount was probably small, lacking in nutrition, and of the poorest quality, but he does not complain. We can see how serene and composed he is.

He also wrote: "What I am going through is nothing compared to the sufferings of the Daishonin on Sado."

His standard of comparison for his time in prison was the persecution endured by the Daishonin. Compared to what the Daishonin suffered while in exile on Sado, his experience in prison is nothing serious, he declares. We are the successors of Mr. Makiguchi. I hope you will have this same spirit.

What is the use in allowing ourselves to be disturbed by life's minor troubles and hardships? They are the fate of all human beings, and will never disappear completely. The four sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death are an inseparable part of human existence.

A life that goes by without any hardships, problems, or sadness would be incredibly empty, shallow, and meaningless. The ultimate teaching of the Daishonin's Buddhism is that earthly desires or sufferings lead to enlightenment. The greater our suffering and the deeper our pain, the greater the enlightenment and joy we will gain.

On January 7, Mr. Makiguchi also wrote: "When you believe wholeheartedly in the Gohonzon, even if you suffer from a succession of ailments or troubles, you will be able to overcome them."

He is voicing his great conviction that though the three obstacles and four devils are bound to arise when we exert ourselves assiduously in our Buddhist practice, we can definitely surmount them and turn poison into medicine if we remain steadfast in faith.

Ten days later, January 17, Mr. Makiguchi wrote: "Concentrating utterly on my faith is my work at this time. As long as I do that, I have nothing to worry about. Depending upon one's state of mind, one can be completely safe even in hell." [The prison censors blacked out the word "hell."]

On January 26, he wrote: "Depending on one's state of mind, even hell can be enjoyable." [This entire sentence was blacked out by the censors.]

Because of his lofty state of mind, Mr. Makiguchi's cold, dark prison cell became a safe, enjoyable place, a place where there was nothing to worry about. He had truly attained a calm and imperturbable state of mind—reflecting the Buddhist principles that "hell is itself the Land of Tranquil Light" and "earthly desires are enlightenment," as described in the Daishonin's writings.

Note on terminology: The Land of Tranquil Light, also called the Land of Eternally Tranquil Light, is the Buddha land, which is free from impermanence and impurity.

This was the magnificent faith and life state of the founder of the Soka Gakkai. Mr. Makiguchi was a person who deeply internalized the teachings of Nichiren Daishonin.

When we consider what Mr. Makiguchi endured, all sufferings seem minor. There is no greater pride than being Mr. Makiguchi's successors.

From a speech at a nationwide youth division leaders meeting, Tokyo, January 15, 1992.

Section 15.14: The Significance of Nichiren Daishonin's "Casting Off the Transient and Revealing the True"

President Ikeda explains the significance of Nichiren Daishonin's "casting off the transient and revealing the true" and what it means for our own lives. He also stresses that we can tap our inherent power and potential through our struggles to overcome hardships.

At the time of the Tatsunokuchi Persecution, Nichiren Daishonin discarded his transient status as an ordinary practitioner at the stage of hearing the name and words of the truth.

Note on terminology: An ordinary practitioner at the stage of hearing the name and words of the truth is an ordinary person who has taken the first step in Buddhist practice, that of accepting and understanding the words of the Buddha's teachings, and who has not yet gained any results or effects of practice. In other words, it means an ordinary person who has a spirit to believe in the Buddha's teachings.

While remaining an ordinary person, he revealed his true identity as the Buddha of limitless joy enlightened since time without beginning.

Note on terminology: The Buddha of limitless joy enlightened from time without beginning, also called the Buddha of beginningless time, is the eternal Buddha who has awakened to the supreme Law, embodies that Law, and freely employs its benefit. "Time without beginning" does not indicate a particular point in the distant past, but eternity.

Put another way, as an ordinary person, he manifested the eternal Thus Come One that is one with the eternal Mystic Law, the fundamental law of the universe.

After casting off the transient and revealing the true in this way, the Daishonin took on his role as the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law. In that capacity, he began inscribing the Gohonzon in the form of a mandala as the object of fundamental respect or devotion and the foundation for all people's lives.

Incidentally, we should note that in "casting off the transient," the Chinese character for "casting off" also means "opening up."

The Daishonin manifested the Buddha of limitless joy as none other than an ordinary person. If we overlook this point, then we may incorrectly conclude that attaining Buddhahood means becoming something superior to and distinct from human beings. Nichiren Daishonin did not give up his life as an ordinary person. Rather, he brilliantly manifested the eternal Buddha within his life as an ordinary person.

I want to note another important point. Namely, that this principle also applies to us. When we dedicate our lives to kosen-rufu, overcoming painful suffering and persevering in faith, we, too, can actualize the principle of "casting off the transient and revealing the true." As ordinary people, we can bring forth the same life state of Buddhahood as Nichiren Daishonin.

How fortunate we are to have encountered this teaching. If the goal were to become some sort of special, idealized superhuman being, then happiness in this life would be unattainable.

Nichiren Daishonin is the Buddha of the Latter Day precisely because he showed that all people have the potential to attain Buddhahood and revealed the means for doing so. He demonstrated for us through his own life that an ordinary person can attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

"Casting off the transient and revealing the true" means each of us establishing a solid self that can surmount all difficulties, break through fundamental ignorance, and express our inherently enlightened nature, the Dharma nature.

Note on terminology: Fundamental ignorance is the most deeply rooted illusion inherent in life, said to give rise to all other illusions. It is the inability to see or recognize the truth, particularly, the true nature of one's life. The Dharma nature, also called the fundamental nature of enlightenment, is the unchanging nature inherent in all things and phenomena.

Becoming people whose Buddhahood shines forth ever more brightly the greater the challenges we face is the path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

In that respect, the key to true self-development is to exert ourselves in faith, in our Buddhist practice, to overcome all obstacles.

We don't take on difficulties only after deepening our faith. Instead, by facing difficulties we can polish our lives and develop invincible, diamond-like faith. Whatever problems we have, we should chant honestly about them to the Gohonzon. Through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we will find a way to overcome them. This difference in the order of things may seem subtle, but it is decisive.

As we strive to fulfill our unique missions, we inevitably encounter difficulties. But as long as our hearts remain steadfast and our faith firm, there is no hardship we cannot surmount, no ordeal that we cannot break through. We inherently possess immeasurable power. That is the power of the Buddha of limitless joy enlightened since time without beginning. Therefore, the more we challenge ourselves, the more power we can bring forth. Faith enables us to tap this hidden treasure. Great hardships are springboards to profound awakening and mean we are certain to attain Buddhahood.

The Daishonin taught his disciples this way of life through personally triumphing over each of the great difficulties and persecutions he faced. During the Tatsunokuchi Persecution, in particular, he clearly outlined the ultimate essence of this way of life to Shijo Kingo. He did so not only for his disciple's sake, but for the sake of posterity.

Shijo Kingo remained steadfast in faith throughout. As a result, mentor and disciple together could attain the fruit of Buddhahood. Tatsunokuchi itself became the Land of Tranquil Light.

The "transient" to be cast off is weakness and cowardice. The Daishonin, by revealing his "true identity" of courage, demonstrated for all people the principle of "casting off the transient and revealing the true."

When we act with the same courageous resolve and spirit as the Daishonin and calmly confront the hardships we encounter, we will actualize our own "casting off the transient and revealing the true."

From The World of Nichiren Daishonin's Writings, volume 2, published in Japanese in January 2004.

Section 15.15: The Soka Gakkai's "Casting Off the Transient and Revealing the True"

At the start of 2008, having just turned 80, President Ikeda called on members to awaken to their fundamental mission and overcome all hardships in order to "cast off the transient and reveal the true" in their own lives. This, he stressed, was vital for the Soka Gakkai as a whole to "cast off the transient and reveal the true."

In May 1951, after surmounting his business troubles and becoming second president, Josei Toda proclaimed: "The Soka Gakkai has 'cast off the transient and revealed the true'!"

This, he explained, was because Soka Gakkai members as a whole had gained a deep awareness of their identity as Bodhisattvas of the Earth and stood up to take part in the struggle for kosen-rufu.

While imprisoned, Mr. Toda realized that he was a Bodhisattva of the Earth. At first, it was his personal awakening. But, later, disciples who shared this sense of mission as Bodhisattvas of the Earth rose to take action alongside him.

The "casting off the transient and revealing the true" of the disciples is central to the "casting off the transient and revealing the true" of the Soka Gakkai.

Mr. Toda emphasized: "Come to understand your life's mission by actually putting the Daishonin's teachings into practice! Understanding your mission intellectually and understanding it through real experience are two different things entirely."

Just one disciple who strives with the same heart as the mentor can galvanize everyone. I fought furiously as that one true disciple. I supported my mentor, broadened the great struggle for kosen-rufu, and opened the path to victory. I led the way to achieving Mr. Toda's cherished membership goal of 750,000 households during his lifetime. I actualized his grand vision for promoting peace, culture, and education, and I spread our movement's great philosophy and ideals throughout the world. The disciple who "cast off the transient and revealed the true," just as his mentor instructed, built today's flourishing Soka Gakkai.

"He's someone who always achieves what he says he will"—this was Mr. Toda's evaluation of me, and I regard it as a source of pride and honor.

For what reason have we been born? Why are we alive? When we deeply recognize our fundamental mission in life, we can bring forth immeasurably great power.

Thoughtful individuals around the world have been taking note of our efforts to empower people, especially the youth. Former UN Under-Secretary-General Anwarul K. Chowdhury is one of them. He has praised our organization for bringing out the best in each individual through our conviction that all people possess the capacity to overcome even the greatest difficulties.

I want to proclaim that the time has come once again for the Soka Gakkai to "cast off the transient and reveal the true."

I say to you, my friends: "Take up fresh challenges as if you've been completely reborn!" "Be lions! Be lions, and win victory upon victory!" "Let us live out our lives together for the great and noble cause of kosen-rufu!"

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, January 9, 2008.

Section 15.16: The Power to Change Poison into Medicine

In this selection from The New Human Revolution, the novel's protagonist Shin'ichi Yamamoto (whose character represents President Ikeda) visits the Akita Community Center in July 1972 to encourage members immediately after torrential rains caused widespread damage throughout the northeastern area of Japan.

"I am so sorry to hear about those of you who have been affected by the flooding," Shin'ichi said. "I offer you my sincerest condolences. The important thing is what you do from now. Are you going to be discouraged and allow yourselves to fall into despair? Or will you regard this as an opportunity to show actual proof of our faith and rise up again courageously, determined not to be beaten? Your inner resolve is what decides your happiness or unhappiness.

"Throughout our lives, we are bound to face all kinds of adversity; not only natural disasters but things like bankruptcy, unemployment, illness, accidents, and the death of loved ones. No one's life is ever perfectly smooth.

"In fact, life is an endless series of trials and tribulations, and it would be no exaggeration to say that facing difficulties is indeed what life is about. The question, then, is how to remain unbeaten by these trials and adorn our lives with victory. Buddhism teaches the concept of 'changing poison into medicine.' According to this principle, we can change even the worst circumstances into benefit and happiness through faith. We need to be utterly confident of this.

"From another perspective, this principle is saying that to attain the 'medicine' of Buddhahood, of absolute happiness, we must triumph over the 'poison' of suffering. In other words, suffering is the seed that enables the flower of happiness to bloom. As such, we shouldn't be afraid of hardships. Rather, we should face them with courage.

"We are all Bodhisattvas of the Earth who possess the life state of Buddhahood. We have appeared in this world to lead all people of the Latter Day of the Law to enlightenment. We will never be deadlocked. Adverse circumstances do not cause unhappiness; it is caused by our own despair and negativity.

"It is also important to realize that the suffering you are experiencing now has profound significance. If all of you affected by this natural disaster splendidly rebuild your lives, you will have turned poison into medicine and demonstrated the greatness of Nichiren Buddhism to society. That is the purpose of the struggles you are now facing.

"Please relay the following message from me to all your fellow members: 'Don't be defeated. I hope you will surmount this obstacle and come out victorious. I will continue to send you my sincerest daimoku.'"

From The New Human Revolution, volume 16, "Soaring" chapter.

Section 15.17: Encouragement to Members Suffering Natural Disasters

Natural disasters have been occurring with increasing frequency and intensity around the world. In recent decades, Japan experienced two particularly catastrophic events—the 1995 Great Hanshin Earthquake affecting the Kansai region and the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami.

After the former, President Ikeda, who was scheduled to deliver an important lecture overseas, postponed his departure to remain in Japan to support those affected by the disaster. Even after departing, he continued to write messages for those members during his flight. After his lecture, he returned immediately to Japan and went straight to the Kansai area, where he took the lead in offering support and encouragement. Similarly, after the Tohoku disaster, he sent countless messages to members throughout the affected regions.

The following selected messages also offer encouragement for all those affected by the tragedy of natural disasters around the world.

[After the Great Hanshin Earthquake]

Since the earthquake that devastated Kobe and surrounding areas last month [on January 17, 1995], I have been praying daily for all who lost their lives. I have been chanting not only for Soka Gakkai members, but also for everyone in the region.

Nichiren Daishonin says of a disciple who had died: "When he was alive, he was a Buddha in life, and now he is a Buddha in death. He is a Buddha in both life and death" (WND-1, 456).

Please rest assured that your deceased loved ones are watching over you and your families, and are sure to be reborn speedily.

What's important is that those of us who are alive remain hopeful and become happy. Because of the oneness of life and death, our happiness imparts joy to our deceased loved ones and, at the same time, serves as proof that they dwell in a life state of Buddhahood. On the other hand, when we allow grief to defeat us, it saddens our departed loved ones. Always remember, we are all Buddhas in both life and death. We are always together and one.

Buddhism teaches the principle of "changing poison into medicine." Our faith is anchored in the conviction that "when great evil occurs, great good follows" (WND-1, 1119).

The Lotus Sutra guarantees that "winter always turns to spring" (WND-1, 536).

The teaching of the Mystic Law is for the present and the future.

Treasuring each day of our lives, aware how precious it is, is a way of living that accords with the true spirit of Buddhism.

Nichiren Daishonin teaches: "Life is the foremost of all treasures" (WND-1, 1125). I hope that as long as you live, you will always be able to feel in your hearts what a precious treasure life is—more wondrous than all the treasures in the universe. And, please remember, it is the power of faith in the Mystic Law that makes that treasure shine with boundless brilliance.

The Daishonin also asserts: "A hundred years of practice in the Land of Perfect Bliss cannot compare to the benefit gained from one day's practice in the impure world" (WND-1, 736). Practicing Buddhism just a single day in this "impure world" filled with suffering, he says, brings greater benefit than doing so for a whole century in the Land of Perfect Bliss, a realm free of pain and sorrows.

The Daishonin is speaking of the immense benefit of Buddhist practice in the Latter Day of the Law, and his words underscore how noble it is to strive in a place that is so challenging and demanding.

Life is about challenge and effort. Each day of our lives as Soka Gakkai members brings tremendous fulfillment and immeasurable benefit.

From a discussion with Kansai Region representatives, published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, February 6, 1995.

[In 2000, five years after the Great Hanshin Earthquake, President Ikeda visited the Nagata Culture Center in Kobe's Nagata Ward, one of the areas most seriously damaged in that disaster. He led a memorial gongyo service, offering prayers for those who died in the earthquake, and warmly encouraged members. He also played the piano, performing the tune "Dainanko," which has deep ties to the area.]

I am amazed by the extent to which Nagata has recovered! Though I'm sure there are still many trying challenges ahead of you.

I will continue to support you. I will chant daimoku for you as long as I live.

Please be confident that all your fellow members and loved ones who died in the disaster will rejoin the movement for kosen-rufu without fail.

Life is a struggle. It is a struggle to become happy. But happiness is not simply the absence of hardships. Buddhism teaches that the sufferings we experience as human beings lead us to enlightenment. The Daishonin writes: "There is no true happiness for human beings other than chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo" (WND-1, 681).

Everyone has problems and worries. Everyone meets with misfortune. And the greatest of life's sufferings is death. Death is the inescapable destiny—the karma if you will—of humankind. Remember, however, that when we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and strive for kosen-rufu, our lives embody the Mystic Law. Our practice of Nichiren Buddhism enables us to forge a solid, invincible self and develop the ability and strength to overcome any difficulty or misfortune with serenity. When we die, our lives merge back into the life of the universe and, in rhythm with the Mystic Law, continue to advance on the path of happiness.

The Mystic Law gives us the energy to live our lives to the fullest. The Daishonin assures us that those who embrace the Mystic Law "will grow younger" (WND-1, 464). May the final chapter of your lives, therefore, be bright and vibrant, just like the rich colors of harvest or a glorious sunset.

The Daishonin states: "Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the greatest of all joys" (OTT, 212). Please be cheerful! None are stronger than those who are cheerful. Please live with a spirit of fortitude to make it through all things.

Let's live out our lives together!

I am always chanting daimoku for you. See you again!

From a speech at a memorial gongyo service at the Nagata Culture Center, Hyogo, February 29, 2000.

[After the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami]

I offer my sincerest condolences to everyone affected by the devastating earthquake and tsunami that struck Tohoku five days ago [on March 11, 2011], leaving many people still missing and unaccounted for. I can only imagine your exhaustion. My wife, Kaneko, and I, along with the members throughout Japan and the world, are chanting daimoku for you with all our hearts. We are earnestly praying for your health and well-being and that all Buddhas and bodhisattvas thoroughly protect you.

I also wish to express my heartfelt appreciation to those of you who are devoting yourselves selflessly to rescue and relief efforts, or in other ways are acting as pillars of support for your communities during this difficult time. Takuboku Ishikawa, a renowned youthful poet who hailed from Tohoku declared: "Helping one person is a far greater achievement than becoming the ruler of a country."

You all have my deepest respect and gratitude.

Nichiren Daishonin writes that even if we meet with disasters and calamities, they cannot destroy our heart or mind, the inner essence of life (cf. WND-2, 135). Nothing can destroy the treasures of the heart. Every adversity is but a trial to overcome so that we can attain eternal happiness. Our practice of Nichiren Buddhism, our faith in the Mystic Law, enables us to change all poison into medicine without fail.

I am offering solemn prayers for all your loved ones—family members and friends—who have lost their lives. It is truly heartbreaking. Life, however, is eternal, and through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can transcend the bounds of life and death to connect with those who have passed away. Your deceased loved ones and friends, who through you share a profound connection with the Mystic Law, will definitely be embraced by the heavenly deities, attain Buddhahood, and be reborn quickly somewhere close to you. That is an essential teaching of Nichiren Buddhism.

During the Daishonin's lifetime, the great earthquake of the Shoka era (August 1257) caused unprecedented damage. Grieved by the people's pain and suffering, and amid ongoing great calamities, the Daishonin began to write his treatise "On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land," thereby raising the banner of peace and justice for all humankind. He assures us: "When great evil occurs, great good follows" (WND-1, 1119).

Today, March 16, is the day that my mentor, second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda, entrusted his youthful successors with carrying on the work of kosen-rufu in order to eradicate misery from the face of the earth. Now, let us triumphantly overcome this great disaster by further strengthening our vow for kosen-rufu while wholeheartedly supporting and encouraging one another.

I am fervently praying and calling out to each of you: "Never be defeated! Have courage! Have hope!"

From a message sent to Tohoku members after the Tohoku earthquake and tsunami, published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, March 16, 2011.

[On the second anniversary of the 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami, President Ikeda paid tribute to the members who were striving valiantly to rebuild their lives in the disaster's aftermath.]

What the unprecedented disaster of the March 2011 Tohoku earthquake and tsunami destroyed was as precious as all the treasures of the universe.

Unimaginable numbers of lives were lost. Everyone wishes that their beloved family members, close friends, and fellow members could be returned to them and their dear hometowns restored.

Immediately after the disaster, my heart torn with sorrow, I assured our members in the affected areas that, based on the unerring principles of Buddhism, nothing can destroy the treasures of the heart.

I am deeply moved by how you, my friends in Tohoku, have managed to survive and go on living with such perseverance and fortitude. That you have done so itself attests to your incredibly noble and wondrous mission.

As you continue to live bravely, your departed loved ones will live on with you in your hearts, transcending life and death.

Nichiren Daishonin solemnly writes: "I do not know how long I or anyone else may live, but without fail, I will be with you at the time of your death and guide you from this life to the next" (WND-1, 965).

With his compassionate gaze, the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, Nichiren Daishonin, is watching over all of you who have so admirably managed to go on with life, and over your deceased fellow members and loved ones. He is resolutely protecting every one of you, without exception.

As practitioners who uphold the eternal Mystic Law, ours is a wondrous journey of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity—always together with the Daishonin in both life and death!

From an essay series "Our Brilliant Path to Victory," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, March 11, 2013.
