Chapter 13: "Faith for a Harmonious Family"

Section 13.1: Our Own Human Revolution Is the Key to Achieving Family Harmony

President Ikeda has set forth five eternal guidelines for the Soka Gakkai: (1) Faith for a harmonious family, (2) Faith for achieving happiness, (3) Faith for overcoming obstacles, (4) Faith for health and long life, and (5) Faith for absolute victory. (An excerpt from the 2003 speech in which he presented these guidelines appears in the Supplementary Reading section at the end of this chapter.)

This chapter focuses on the first of these five guidelines, "Faith for a harmonious family."

Striving to create a harmonious family starts with our own inner transformation, our human revolution. Those around us are indeed the mirror in which our human revolution is reflected. When we change, others change, our environment changes, and the world changes. One of the most important and fundamental arenas where this drama of human revolution takes place is our family.

In this selection, President Ikeda discusses the importance of striving in faith with the goal of creating happy and harmonious families. He states that one person's human revolution is certain to lead to a positive transformation in their family.

"Faith for a harmonious family" is an eternal guideline articulated by second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda.

A bright, positive family joined by ties of trust and affection is a reflection of a pure and rich spirit. It is also both the first step and ultimate goal in our efforts to build a world of peace and happiness.

Over the years, countless Soka Gakkai members have transformed bleak, negative family situations into bright, happy ones. This is the proud personal history of human revolution achieved by each individual, which constitutes the strong, deep foundation of the Soka Gakkai's history.

The example of Soka Gakkai members creating harmonious families is both a living model for all people and, I believe, a shining symbol of the future of Japan and the world.

Our aim is to actualize an ideal society where personal happiness and social prosperity go hand in hand, which of course includes harmonious families. The key to building a sound and healthy family life is for each person, based on the Mystic Law, to make efforts to establish a strong and secure life for themselves while also contributing to the prosperity of society and world peace.

Not all who take faith in Nichiren Buddhism have their whole families start practicing with them. Sometimes, people encounter intense opposition from family members. But such opposition is just a test of faith, and is certain to be resolved once one has carried out one's human revolution and developed into a truly fine member of society and of one's family.

The "Former Affairs of King Wonderful Adornment" (27th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra relates the story of the past lives of Bodhisattva Medicine King and Bodhisattva Medicine Superior as the two brothers Pure Storehouse and Pure Eye. These brothers worked together with their mother, Pure Virtue, to persuade their father, King Wonderful Adornment, to take faith in Buddhism. To achieve this, Pure Storehouse and Pure Eye displayed various supernatural powers. This is a metaphor for demonstrating the power of the Buddha and the power of the Law—which, expressed in modern terms, is nothing other than showing proof of one's human revolution.

I believe that any revolution that is genuine—that truly serves the needs of the people—will also clearly manifest itself in the family. Such a family-based revolution is the most fundamental and lasting kind of revolution; it will create an enduring groundswell and become the tide of the times that no one can hold back.

From an editorial titled "Faith for a Harmonious Family," published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, April 1968.

Section 13.2: The Miraculous Words "Thank You"

Being able to have deep appreciation for everyone around us is proof of our human revolution. Appreciation for others accelerates that inner transformation.

"Thank you" is a miraculous expression. It energizes us when we say it to others, and encourages us when we hear it said to us. I am constantly saying "Thank you" from morning to night, every day. When I travel abroad, it is the one expression from the language of the country I am visiting that I always learn and use. Whether it is "Thank you," "Merci," "Danke," "Gracias," "Spasiba," or "Xie xie," I put my whole heart into expressing my appreciation, looking the other person in the eye as I do so.

When we speak or hear the words "thank you," the armor falls from our hearts and we communicate on a deep level. "Thank you" is the essence of nonviolence. It contains respect for the other person, humility, and a profound affirmation of life. It possesses a positive, upbeat optimism. It has strength. A person who can sincerely say thank you has a healthy, vital spirit; each time we say those words, our hearts sparkle and life force wells up within us.

Having gratitude and appreciation for the countless people and things that support our lives—that awareness, that feeling, that joy—will invite even greater happiness. Rather than being thankful because we are happy, being thankful itself will make us happy. Also, chanting with gratitude puts us in rhythm with the universe, turning our lives in a positive direction.

When we cannot say thank you, our personal growth has stopped. When we are growing, we can see how wonderful others are, too. When we stop growing, all we see are other people's faults.

At home, instead of trying to change your partner or your children to your liking, why not start with a simple "thank you"?

There is a women's division member who suffered from dementia in her later years, and she was unable to remember even the names of her family members. But when the doctor asked her what was the happiest moment in her life, she immediately responded: "When my daughter was born. I was so happy!" Hearing this, tears welled up in the eyes of her daughter, who was standing nearby. "Thank you," she said. "Thank you, mother. That was all I needed to hear."

The daughter reflected on how she was always scolding her own son. "Yes," she thought, "how happy I was when he was born!" Yet, over the years, driven by some mental image of an ideal child, she had tried to mold her son to fit that form, thinking only of where he didn't measure up to the ideal and dwelling on his shortcomings in one respect or another. Still, in spite of how demanding she was, her son tried his best to live up to her expectations. He was kind to her. As these thoughts came to her, she was overcome with gratitude toward him. "Thank you. I'm just happy you are alive and well. I'm just happy you're here beside me. Thank you."

She saw her son with fresh eyes, and suddenly she had so many reasons to be grateful and happy. After all, though it was hard getting her son out of bed in the mornings, he would eventually get up, even if it was sometimes at the last minute. That, in itself, was an amazing thing. He may have been a little picky about his food, and he may not have been at the top of his class, but she was just grateful he went to school and wore a bright smile each day.

She was grateful for everything, even when nothing special happened. She was grateful for each day that passed with her family safe and well. She realized that taking so much for granted had been a symptom of a deep and pervading arrogance on her part.

Similarly, there are people who, when diagnosed with a serious illness, realize for the first time just how much they have taken their health for granted and never appreciated all that they had.

I hope that, every once in a while, you will look your partner in the eye and say thank you. Instead of eating dinner together in silence, take the time to express your appreciation. It may seem a bit embarrassing at first, but try it: you'll see how it changes your life.

From an essay series "Life Is Wonderful," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, May 29, 2004.

Section 13.3: Showing Appreciation for Our Parents Is the Heart of Buddhism

In encouraging a young women's division member who was concerned about her father not practicing Nichiren Buddhism, President Ikeda said this was an expression of her father's compassion, that her father was teaching her to be compassionate. In the following excerpt, President Ikeda warmly encourages members in similar situations, calling on them to be openhearted and accepting, and to respect their parents and treat them well.

I'm sure that many of you have parents or other family members who are not practicing Nichiren Buddhism, but there is no reason to feel anxious or worried on that account. When you as an individual stand up with genuine faith, you can lead all of your loved ones to the path of eternal happiness. Such is the limitless power of the Mystic Law.

When the sun rises, it illuminates everything on earth. When a single lighthouse shines out to sea at night, countless vessels can navigate safely. When a family has one person who acts as a strong pillar, all of its members can lead secure, tranquil lives.

You are suns that shine and illuminate others with happiness. You are lighthouses that guide people to attaining Buddhahood. You are the solid central pillars of good fortune and benefit that bring happiness to your families. Those who have formed a connection with Buddhism will eventually come to accept and practice it. Please live your lives in a cheerful, positive manner, embracing everyone around you with an open heart and broad-minded humanity.

In a letter to the young Nanjo Tokimitsu, Nichiren Daishonin says that if one wishes to give something nice to one's parents, but has nothing at hand, then one should simply give them a smile two or three times a day (cf. WND-2, 636).

Parents are delighted by their children's smiles, which brighten their hearts like rays of sunshine. Showing appreciation for one's parents is the heart of Buddhism. Nothing makes parents happier than pleasant, loving interactions with their children that fill them with pride and joy at having raised such fine human beings. They'll even be ready to listen to whatever such children have to say.

If every time you see your parents, you insist they start practicing Buddhism, saying they will suffer unless they do, you'll only make them unhappy and resentful.

It's only natural that you will sincerely chant for your parents to attain Buddhahood, but I also hope that your conduct toward them will always be pervaded by wisdom, warmth, and common sense. Showing how you have grown as a human being is the best way to communicate the truth of Buddhism to those around you. Doing so will increase both your own and your family's good fortune and benefit.

From a speech at an SGI general meeting, France, June 16, 1991.

Section 13.4: Advice on Raising and Educating Children in the Home

In a speech celebrating the establishment of the SGI-USA's Future Division, President Ikeda offers six points of advice for raising and educating children in the home.

I would now like to turn to the subject of how we raise and educate children in the home, sharing a few points as they come to mind. I have observed many families and experienced many situations, and what I offer are my own conclusions. I will be most happy if they are of some use to you.

(1) Let Children Focus on Their Studies

First, the members of the Future Division should make study their first priority. It goes without saying that faith is important, but faith is something we practice throughout our entire lives. There is a certain age and period in life when one should study. If one doesn't work hard during that time, one may fail to acquire important knowledge and skills, and come to regret it deeply later.

Faith manifests itself in daily life. For the members of the Future Division, faith is expressed in their studies. During this period, to devote themselves to study represents an important part of their Buddhist practice. If they neglect their studies because they are busy doing gongyo or attending meetings, it certainly cannot be called the correct way of faith.

Even if sometimes your children can't do gongyo, there is no reason for you as parents to become overly concerned or agitated about this. There are occasions when simply chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo three times is quite sufficient.

The main thing is that they continue practicing. It's important to foster in children the spirit to stay connected to the Gohonzon and the Soka Gakkai throughout their lives. It's fine if they progress in their faith and practice bit by bit. Parents should be broad-minded on this matter. They might even sometimes reassure a child who is busy with studying by saying: "Don't worry, I'll do gongyo for you today."

In fact, putting too much pressure on children to practice may only alienate them from faith. I hope you will lead them wisely so that they can grow and develop freely and naturally in the best possible way.

(2) Take Time for Parent-Child Communication

Next, I would like to request that, no matter how busy you may be, you make an effort to get together and talk with your children. The length of time is not important. What matters is that you use wisdom.

Even if it's only a brief encounter, give your children a hug when you see them. Bond with them, talk with them, and try to make time to listen to what they have to say. As long as you have love and compassion, you will find the wisdom to make it work.

Faith manifests itself as wisdom. The purpose of our faith is to become wise so that we can live our lives wisely.

Even if we talk about our commitment to helping others, our words remain empty if we cannot genuinely communicate with our own children or build strong and happy families.

The good fortune that accrues to parents who apply themselves diligently to Soka Gakkai activities will protect their children without fail. Please have that conviction. Nevertheless, you must still make positive efforts to open and sustain dialogue with your children, not allowing yourselves to neglect them, claiming that you're too busy, or that it can't be helped, or telling yourselves that somehow things will work out on their own. That is what it takes to be responsible, compassionate parents.

It's not a question of conforming to any particular style. It is the heart that is important. Are your hearts connected? Some families may always be together physically, but their hearts estranged from one another. Other families may only be together for brief periods but manage to enjoy rich and lively heart-to-heart communication at such times. Families who share bonds of closeness as a result of consistent efforts to stay connected feel comfortable and at ease with one another, no matter where they are or what they are doing.

I ask that parents come up with creative ways for their families to stay connected and continually strive to improve themselves together with their children.

(3) Avoid Arguing in Front of Your Children

Always remember that a child is a person, an individual with a distinct personality. Children can at times be even more keenly perceptive than adults. That is why we must be careful how we behave in front of them. For example, parents should avoid arguing in front of their children. If you must argue, do it where they cannot see you! Children are saddened when their parents fight. They go off to school with heavy hearts, and they will not forget the incident for a long time.

According to one psychologist, when children see their parents fighting, they are often shaken to the very core, experiencing fear and anxiety as if the ground has given way beneath them. Tall trees grow from secure and solid ground. Please give your children a home where they can enjoy tranquility and peace of mind.

(4) Refrain from Scolding Your Child at the Same Time

Sons tend to rebel when scolded by their fathers, while they are more likely to listen to their mothers' scolding. The worst thing is for the father and the mother to gang up and scold the child together. This leaves the child with no one to turn to.

Fathers tend to have a soft spot for daughters and, consequently, are too easy on them. Mothers and daughters, meanwhile, often share a deep, natural understanding as women. That is why it is often better for mothers to talk with their daughters as well.

Regarding parents scolding their children, President Toda said: "When fathers get angry, they alienate their children. But even when mothers get angry, their children stay close to them."

This wisdom is based on an understanding of human behavior and psychology.

Of course, there are always differences among cultures and among individual households, but I hope these observations may provide some helpful insight for you.

(5) Be Fair and Don't Compare One Child with Another

Parents must be fair. They must never favor one child over another for being smarter, better-looking, or more accomplished in anyway. A parent's single thoughtless remark can often deeply wound a child and instill a sense of inferiority. How much worse the damage will be if children are always being compared with their siblings and treated unfairly! They will be starved for affection and feel lonely and hurt. Under such circumstances, they cannot grow and develop in a healthy fashion.

Watch over your children with warm affection and encourage them. Discover and praise their strengths, building their confidence. Become their unfailing allies, support them, shower them with love and believe utterly in their potential. Respect each child's individuality. That's a parent's role.

Our society and our schools may operate on the unfeeling principle of competition, judging and selecting people by their abilities and appearance. That is all the more reason why it is important for the family to be a place of fairness and equality, where everyone is valued as a unique and irreplaceable individual.

(6) Share Your Dedication to Faith with Your Children

Ultimately, to raise children to become fine adults, parents need to be firmly in tune with their children and grow together with them, moving forward as one.

As Soka Gakkai members, we are dedicating ourselves for the sake of the Law and the happiness of others. Ours is not a self-centered existence. As a result, we may be busier than most and perhaps not have as much time to relax with our families as we would like. Nevertheless, we continue to devote ourselves to others.

Ours is the noblest way of life. We must make sure our children can understand and respect our beliefs, our way of life, and our dedication. It is a mistake to assume that they will somehow come to know we love them or to understand our commitment to kosen-rufu on their own, without us having to say anything. We must make conscious efforts to verbalize and communicate our thoughts and feelings to them—and to do so wisely, in a relaxed way, without pressuring them. Finding the wisdom for this task is an expression of our faith.

I have heard that the breakdown of the family has become a major social problem in the United States. The same tendencies are emerging in Japan. In light of this situation, and also prompted by the announcement of the upcoming establishment of the SGI-USA Future Division, I have shared with you several points that come to mind on this topic.

"Faith for a harmonious family" is one of the eternal guidelines of the Soka Gakkai. I am visualizing the day when the youngsters nurtured by your warm and delightful families grow to become outstanding leaders of the 21st century who will illuminate America and the entire world like a brilliant constellation of stars or the dazzling sun. With that thought, I conclude my speech.

From a speech at an SGI representatives conference, U.S.A., February 3, 1993.

Section 13.5: Accepting Others for Who They Are

President Ikeda explains that good parenting begins with recognizing and accepting children for who they are.

Many children today say that they don't feel as if they belong anywhere, that there is nowhere they can feel completely accepted. This may be because many families have adopted the value criteria of schools and businesses, always measuring and ranking children against some standard of performance or excellence.

Children feel that the harder they try to please their parents, the more their parents expect of them. When they ask why such demands are being made on them, their parents say: "It's for your own future," or "I demand so much of you because I love you." This can lead to children coming to see themselves as worthless and falling into despair because they can't live up to their parents' love and expectations. Such feelings of inadequacy or even self-loathing build up and cause children great suffering.

The cheerless view of life presented by parents who can only express their love for their children by scolding them to "study harder" may itself be the root cause of children's anger and frustration.

The first step is to recognize, accept, and embrace your children for who they are. Don't force your idealized image of the perfect child on them. Make sure they know you love them for who they are, not because they are well-behaved or get good grades in school. Give them all the love they need, and assure them that whatever they may do, you are their greatest friend and ally.

That's the way to enable children to learn to love themselves, and children who love themselves can nurture and develop themselves.

If children can learn to think for themselves, questioning why they are doing something, and motivate themselves to contribute to the happiness and welfare of others, they will be unstoppable. This will be all the more so if parents set such an example through their own behavior and actions.

From an essay series "Looking toward the Future—Dialogues with Leaders from Various Fields," published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, March 2000.

Section 13.6: A Partnership of Deepening Love and Respect

In this selection, President Ikeda replies to a question about divorce and then goes on to share important insights for developing a partnership of deepening love and respect.

"Should couples in troubled marriages refrain from divorce and instead stay together to work at changing their karma?"

This is an individual matter. No one else has the right to say that someone should or should not get divorced. Nor can anyone say a person has no faith because he or she is divorced. Divorce is a matter of personal choice.

Whether or not a couple gets divorced, the important thing is that they become happy in the end, that they do their human revolution. To be happy, whether or not one is married; to be happy, whether or not one has children—that is what faith is about, because happiness is something that exists within our own hearts.

We are born alone and we die alone. The purpose of this lifetime is to transform our own selves. That is why we need to do our best, bringing those around us to function as good friends or influences and viewing everything we do as part of our Buddhist practice.

Someone once asked President Toda this question: "Things are not going very well between my partner and me. Should I try to stick it out? Or do you think I ought to get a divorce?"

He replied: "It's not my place to tell you what to do about your marriage. I can neither tell you not to get divorced nor to get divorced. The only thing I can say is that unless you break through the karma that led to you having such a problematic relationship, then, even if you separate, you are bound to experience the same kind of suffering in the future. And if you're going to have to go through the same suffering anyway, then perhaps it's not too late to do something about it in your present marriage." This is from Toda Josei zenshu, or Collected Writings of Josei Toda, volume 2.

It's ideal if the parents of a child get along well. But if they don't and end up divorcing, that doesn't necessarily mean that the child will turn out badly. There are many cases where children grow into fine, upstanding people precisely because of such hardships.

Ultimately, you have to make your own decision based on reflecting deeply on your life, seeing yourself for who you are, and striving tirelessly to accomplish your human revolution in the place you are now. As long as you have such strong faith, you will definitely become happy in the end. No matter what happens, as long as you have the faith to continue advancing toward the achievement of kosen-rufu without giving up your practice, you will be victorious in the end. That's all you need to understand.

If people do get divorced, then, rather than brooding over the past, it would be wonderful if they could look at the experience as a valuable lesson and work for kosen-rufu even harder than before. I would hope that those around them would provide warm support. I also hope that those children who are in single-parent families will not feel lonely but will instead, because of that, open their hearts and expand their circle of friends all the more.

It is said that most marriages are not 100 percent successful. Some have even gone so far as to suggest that 99 percent of all marriages are unsuccessful!

In reality, many families who appear to have everything going for them actually have many problems. It was the French essayist Montaigne who said: "There is hardly less torment in running a family than in running a whole country." This is from The Complete Essays.

When a couple has similar life conditions, it is only natural that they will lock horns from time to time. But if you can take a step back and regard your partner with the compassion you would have for your own child for example, you'll be able to be more forgiving and empathetic, and avoid unnecessary confrontations. How much better it would be not to take your partner's nagging so personally, to be bighearted enough to see it as an expression of their natural vitality, a sign that she or he is alive and well. If you can achieve such an expansive life state, then even your partner's nagging will sound instead like sweet birdsong.

Most important, in any case, is to have love and compassion for one another. Other than that, the key is to chant daimoku together, aspiring for the greatest heights, for true happiness.

All couples are essentially two separate individuals with different backgrounds and life experiences. That's why, without patience and a conscious effort to understand each other, they cannot succeed as a couple. It takes patience and perseverance for a couple to make a life together, while striving to create a safe, supportive home environment, to work at their respective jobs, to care for their children and provide them with a proper education, as well as to take action to help others.

Happiness is built on patience and perseverance. There are many who dream about happiness without being willing to invest much effort. But that is merely a dream—a fairy tale, a simplistic and childish view of life. This illusion breaks up many marriages. To seek happiness that way can only end in misery.

Making steady efforts to build a life together, having the patience and perseverance to move forward together—these are the foundation from which real love develops. Real love means wanting to share your life with the other person forever. Real marriage is when you have been married for 25 years and feel an even deeper love than you did when you first met. True love is something that deepens. Love that does not is on the level of simple attraction or liking.

It is also important for a couple to thank and praise each other often. It can be for anything—just appreciating and praising each other is what matters. Nothing comes from pointing out the other person's faults. That's just foolishness.

Couples should strive to make their home a bright and happy place. You have to decide, "As long as I'm around, I'll always make things happy and bright." If you yourself shine like the sun, there will be no darkness wherever you go in the world. Similarly, if there is one person in the home who shines like the sun, the entire family will be illuminated.

From The Wisdom of the Lotus Sutra, volume 6, published in Japanese in August 2000.

Supplementary Reading

Let us look back to the Headquarters leaders meeting of December 1957—the month that second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda's lifelong goal of 750,000 member households was achieved. At that historic meeting, Mr. Toda announced three guidelines of faith:

Faith for a harmonious family

Faith for each person to achieve happiness

Faith for overcoming obstacles

Since that time, we have advanced toward kosen-rufu with these points engraved in our hearts as the three eternal guidelines of the Soka Gakkai. Their purpose is to provide a clear direction or focus, so that our members—in their respective lives and circumstances, in their homes, workplaces, and communities—will not be defeated by difficulties nor fall into the trap of negativity and complaint, but will instead live with hope and triumph over all.

The first guideline is "Faith for a harmonious family." Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Those who now believe in the Lotus Sutra will gather fortune from ten thousand miles away" (WND-1, 1137). He also cites the words of the Great Teacher Dengyo: "When in the family honor is paid diligently to the teachings, the seven disasters will most certainly be banished" (WND-2, 1026).

How wonderful it is to have the sound of the Mystic Law reverberating in the home! Strong faith is like a powerful magnet, attracting good fortune "from ten thousand miles away." It acts as an impenetrable defense that repels all misfortune. With this conviction, please make your homes castles of happiness and peace.

In many cases, other family members are not practicing the Daishonin's Buddhism. There is no need to worry or grow anxious about this. That is because, if we ourselves stand up earnestly and confidently in faith, we can lead all of our family and relatives in the direction of happiness and hope. We are like a solitary lighthouse on a dark night, enabling numerous ships to safely sail the seas.

The Daishonin writes:

"The Venerable Maudgalyayana put his faith in the Lotus Sutra, which is the greatest good there is, and thus not only did he himself attain Buddhahood, but his father and mother did so as well. And, amazing as it may seem, all the fathers and mothers of the preceding seven generations and the seven generations that followed, indeed, of countless lifetimes before and after, were able to become Buddhas. In addition, all their sons, their wives or husbands, their retainers, supporters, and countless other persons not only were enabled to escape from the three evil paths, but all attained the first stage of security and then Buddhahood, the stage of perfect enlightenment." (WND-1, 820)

In light of this passage, there is absolutely no need for family discord about faith. I hope that you will exhibit a broad-minded wisdom, chanting and working to patiently and steadfastly create happy, harmonious families where good cheer and joyous laughter abound.

The great French writer Victor Hugo said: "Laughter is like sunshine; it chases winter away from the human face." This is from Les Miserables.

Some of you have lost beloved family members. From the Buddhist perspective, however, this has a deep, deep significance, and you mustn't allow yourselves to be defeated by grief.

Madame Deng Yingchao was preceded in death by her beloved husband, Chinese premier Zhou Enlai. She, more than anyone, was filled with sorrow and grief, but when she saw multitudes of others weeping, she declared: "Let's be strong. Let's not cry. Crying won't bring anyone back to life. I myself wept only on three occasions [after my husband's passing]. If tears would bring Enlai back, then I would weep with all of my being. What we must do instead is dry our tears and carry on Enlai's work. . . ."

I have observed the lives of innumerable people up to now, and I can say with absolute certainty that all who stood up in faith at a crucial moment have gone on to become happy.

No prayer to the Gohonzon goes unanswered. The Mystic Law is a great teaching that enables us to change poison into medicine. Through faith, we can transform all sufferings into something positive and beneficial, and develop a higher state of life.

Praising Nanjo Tokimitsu, who inherited the indomitable faith of his father [Nanjo Hyoe Shichiro], the Daishonin writes: "You and your late father, because you both have faith in the Lotus Sutra, will be reborn . . . together" (WND-2, 500).

Faith is the greatest of all treasures. Passing on correct faith to your children is the surest way for both parent and child, and for the entire family as well, to walk the path of eternal happiness.

In that respect, too, I hope you will work even harder, both in your homes and in your local areas, to nurture our Future Division members.

The second guideline is "Faith for each person to achieve happiness." [Based on a proposal made by President Ikeda, in the five eternal guidelines this has been simplified to "Faith for achieving happiness."]

Referring to a Lotus Sutra passage, the Daishonin comments: "If there are a hundred or a thousand people who uphold this sutra, without a single exception all one hundred or one thousand of them will become Buddhas" (WND-1, 1099). We can definitely become happy. This is the Daishonin's promise.

Faith equals daily life. While struggling valiantly in the midst of society, we are advancing kosen-rufu for the sake of the Law and for the happiness of our fellow human beings. As a result of these efforts, great benefit wells forth in our lives. We can also lead others with whom we have a connection toward the path of happiness.

In a famous passage, the Daishonin declares: "Winter always turns to spring. Never, from ancient times on, has anyone heard or seen of winter turning back into autumn. Nor have we ever heard of a believer in the Lotus Sutra who turned into an ordinary [unenlightened] person" (WND-1, 536).

We are resolved to share this great Buddhist teaching of hope with as many people as possible so that they can form a connection with Buddhism that will lead them to true happiness and fulfillment.

Happiness is not something given to us by others or that comes from somewhere outside. It is something that we ourselves must achieve with our own hearts. As the Daishonin says, "It is the heart that is important" (WND-1, 1000).

In another of his writings, we find the statement: "Fortune comes from one's heart and makes one worthy of respect" (WND-1, 1137). Our Buddhist practice enables us to deepen and strengthen our hearts to the ultimate degree.

Each person's happiness leads to kosen-rufu. President Toda remarked humorously: "Whatever you are doing for yourselves ultimately contributes to kosen-rufu and the world. So I hope that you'll use most of your efforts in faith for your own happiness, and what's left over, please send this way for the sake of kosen-rufu." This is from Toda Josei zenshu, or Collected Writings of Josei Toda, volume 4.

What is important for achieving happiness? The Daishonin repeatedly stresses that it is making sure that we are not deceived or led astray by evil friends, or negative influences, which have the power to "destroy countless good minds" (cf. WND-2, 135, 258).

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin says: "The element ku in the word kudoku [benefit] means good fortune or happiness. It also refers to the merit achieved by wiping out evil" (OTT, 148). Happiness means defeating the fundamental ignorance inherent in life.

Note on terminology: Fundamental ignorance is the most deeply rooted illusion inherent in life, said to give rise to all other illusions. It is the inability to see or recognize the truth, particularly, the true nature of one's life.

There can be no genuine happiness unless we fight against negative influences and devilish functions.

The third guideline is "Faith for overcoming obstacles." The Daishonin writes: "If you propagate [this teaching], devils will arise without fail. If they did not, there would be no way of knowing that this is the correct teaching" (WND-1, 501).

The mentors and disciples who practice in accord with the Buddha's teachings and carry out kosen-rufu are certain to be beset by the three powerful enemies and even greater hatred and jealousy than was experienced during Shakyamuni's lifetime.

Note on terminology: The three powerful enemies are three types of arrogant people who persecute those who propagate the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni Buddha's death, described in the concluding verse section of the "Encouraging Devotion" (13th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The Great Teacher Miao-lo of China summarizes them as arrogant lay people, arrogant priests, and arrogant false sages.

Encountering such obstacles is proof that we are faithfully practicing the correct teaching of Buddhism. Moreover, it is through overcoming obstacles that we can attain the indestructible life state of Buddhahood.

That is why the Daishonin declares: "At such a time, the three obstacles and four devils will invariably appear, and the wise will rejoice while the foolish will retreat" (WND-1 637); and "The greater the hardships befalling him [the votary of the Lotus Sutra], the greater the delight he feels, because of his strong faith" (WND-1, 33). This is the very essence of Nichiren Buddhism and the heart of the Soka Gakkai.

Note on terminology: The three obstacles and four devils are various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism. The three obstacles are (1) the obstacle of earthly desires, (2) the obstacle of karma, and (3) the obstacle of retribution. The four devils are (1) the hindrance of the five components, (2) the hindrance of earthly desires, (3) the hindrance of death, and (4) the hindrance of the devil king.

President Toda did his utmost to encourage members who were struggling amid various difficulties. He said: "The Daishonin's Buddhism is a religion that enables those facing adversity to attain happiness. None is stronger than a person who has faced and triumphed over painful hardships. Such a person can become a real friend and ally to those who are truly suffering."

As long as the Soka Gakkai spirit blazes brightly, we will never be deadlocked in our efforts to advance kosen-rufu.

"Those with the heart of a lion king are sure to attain Buddhahood" (WND-1, 302). Stand up and speak out with lionlike courage!—this is the Daishonin's teaching. Let us continue to overcome all obstacles and win with the invincible heart of a lion king.

I would now like to offer two new guidelines in addition to the first three. They are:

Faith for health and long life

Faith for absolute victory

To encourage a sincere follower who was battling illness, the Daishonin wrote:

"Life is the most precious of all treasures. . . . One day of life is more valuable than all the treasures of the major world system. . . . Moreover you have encountered the Lotus Sutra. If you live even one day longer, you can accumulate that much more benefit. How truly precious your life is!" (WND-1, 955)

Life is the most precious treasure of all. May every one of you enjoy good health and longevity, living each irreplaceable day to the fullest and creating infinite and immeasurable value.

The 21st century is the century of life—which means it is also the century of health and longevity. I hope you will all lead lives of value creation that brilliantly exemplify that ideal.

In a letter written at the start of a new year, the Daishonin sent these words of encouragement to Nichigen-nyo, the wife of Shijo Kingo: "You will grow younger, and your good fortune will accumulate" (WND-1, 464). The Mystic Law enables us to grow younger and happier in both body and mind with each passing year.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, the Daishonin states: "When, while in these four states of birth, aging, sickness, and death, we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we cause them to waft forth the fragrance of the four virtues [eternity, happiness, true self, and purity]" (OTT, 90). Let's live vibrantly, filled with confidence and optimism, enjoying this existence fragrant with the four virtues of "eternity, happiness, true self, and purity." To that end, I hope you will put faith into practice in your daily lives, bringing forth ever greater wisdom.

Strong faith is an important cornerstone of health, because it enables us to draw forth powerful life force, triumph over negative functions, and transform our karma. The Daishonin famously declares: "Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is like the roar of a lion. What sickness can therefore be an obstacle?" (WND-1, 412). Through practicing Nichiren Buddhism, we can strengthen our life force, develop our character, and expand our capacity as individuals. It is also important to work for kosen-rufu within the Soka Gakkai, an organization overflowing with incredible energy and vitality.

President Toda declared with absolute conviction: "If you have strong faith, then just as the Lotus Sutra attests, you will obtain fresh, powerful life force, gaining a new lease on life in terms of your business and in terms of your health. . . . [The things you need to sustain your life] will just keep flowing forth, like water bubbling up from the earth." This is from Toda Josei zenshu, or Collected Writings of Josei Toda, volume 1.

It is my sincerest wish that all of my dear fellow members, without exception, will become experts in the art of living long and healthy lives.

The fifth guideline is "Faith for absolute victory."

Let me again cite a passage by the Daishonin that I have referred to many times: "Buddhism primarily concerns itself with victory or defeat, while secular authority is based on the principle of reward and punishment. For this reason, a Buddha is looked up to as the Hero of the World" (WND-1, 835).

Being victorious is the very heart of Buddhism. In the sutras, the Buddha is given such laudatory titles as "Victor Over All," "Attainer of the Goal," "One Who Has Defeated All Opponents and Is Joyous and Fearless," "One Who Shines like the Himalayas Which Surpass All Other Mountains," and so forth. "Buddha" is another name for an absolute victor.

The Daishonin writes: "Buddhism is reason. Reason will win over your lord" (WND-1, 839). Hence, there is no way that you will be defeated. The triumph of truth and justice is the ultimate law of the universe itself. Firmly believing that with all of one's heart is the essence of faith.

We must win. Only by winning can we achieve justice, secure happiness, and realize kosen-rufu.

From a speech at a conference with visiting SGI representatives and leaders of Tokyo Number 2 Area, Tokyo, December 11, 2003.
