Chapter 5: Transforming Suffering into Joy

Section 5.1: We Are the Protagonists of Our Own Lives

Faith in the Mystic Law ensures that by overcoming great pain and suffering we can build a life state of happiness and vibrant joy. President Ikeda has consistently stressed this life of unfettered, limitless hope.

In this chapter, we will explore the key to overcoming all life's difficulties and to leading lives of victory.

We are each the scriptwriter of our own triumphant drama. We are also its protagonist. Shakespeare wrote in As You Like It: "All the world's a stage, and all the men and women merely players."

Buddhism teaches us that we each write and perform the script of our own life. No one else writes that script for us. We write it, and we are the star who performs it. This extremely active life philosophy is inherent in the teaching of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life."

We are each the author and the main character of our own story. In order for it to be a wonderful production, it's essential that we become so familiar with the scenario that we can picture it vividly. We may need to rehearse it mentally. Sometimes it helps to write down our goals (for example, to pass an examination or to improve at work), and read them over and over again until they are deeply impressed in our minds.

There once was a young boy who had an accident that left one of his legs shorter than the other. His parents, however, never told him that anything was too hard or impossible for him to do. They treated him like any other child and encouraged him to play sports. They taught him that he could do whatever he believed he could, and that if he was unable to do something, it was because he had decided he couldn't before even trying. Their conviction wasn't based on mere idealism or optimism. It was a belief in the latent potential of the human being.

The boy later became a star football player at school, and after graduation he succeeded in society as well. His life perfectly illustrates the following assertion, made by the Russian writer Maksim Gorky in his novel The Lower Depths: "Talent is nothing but faith in yourself, in your own powers."

Sir Walter Scott, the great Scottish author, wrote in Rob Roy: "To the timid and hesitating everything is impossible, because it seems so."

Thinking "It's impossible" or "It can't be done" has the effect of actually making anything and everything impossible. Similarly, if parents constantly tell their children they are hopeless or inept, the children will come to believe it and may wind up fulfilling that expectation.

Nichiren Daishonin cites a passage from the Flower Garland Sutra:

"The mind is like a skilled painter, who creates various forms made up of the five components. Thus of all the phenomena throughout the entire world, there is not a single one that is not created by the mind... Outside of this mind there is no other phenomenon that exists." (WND-2, 844)

The five components, also called the five components of life, consist of form, perception, conception, volition, and consciousness. Buddhism holds that these constituent elements unite temporarily to form an individual living being. Together they also constitute one of the three realms of existence, the other two being the realm of living beings and the realm of the environment.

When we read the Daishonin's letters, we find that he constantly cites sutras and Buddhist scriptures to offer examples and documentary proof relevant to the situations or questions of the recipients, seeking to change their hearts, strengthen their determination, and give them conviction and self-confidence. His words always radiate hope and encouragement, like the sun. This is because he fully understood that when a person's heart changes, everything changes.

Many people ascribe others' success to favorable circumstances. They are likely to think, "If only I had such good luck" or "If only I didn't have this problem to deal with." But that ultimately is just complaining. There is no one who doesn't have problems.

A businessman once said to a friend: "You're always complaining about having so many problems. I know a place where there are at least ten thousand people, and not one of them has even a single problem or worry. Would you like me to take you there?"

His friend said: "Yes, please do!"

And guess where the businessman took him? To a cemetery. He was teaching his friend that as long as we are alive, we will have to deal with problems and sufferings. Challenging ourselves to find ways to overcome these problems gives richness and meaning to our lives.

Buddhism teaches that "earthly desires lead to enlightenment." This means the greater our worries and sufferings, the greater the happiness we can transform them into through the power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

In Shakyamuni's day, there was a woman who had lost her beloved child to illness. Half insane with grief, she wandered the town clutching her dead child to her bosom and begged all those she encountered: "Please give me medicine for my child."

Feeling pity for her, someone took her to see Shakyamuni. When he heard her story, he said: "Do not fret. I will give you good medicine. Go into the town and bring me back some mustard seeds. However, they must be mustard seeds from a family where no one has lost a loved one."

In her quest, the woman walked all over the town, going from door to door. But there was not one family that had not lost a loved one. Finally, it dawned on her: All human beings die. She was not alone in her suffering. To gain insight into the eternity of life, she became a follower of Shakyamuni, and she later came to be respected as a sage. This famous parable about a woman named Kisa Gotami appears in the Therigatha Atthakatha, which is the Commentary to the Therigatha.

By employing the expedient means of sending her out in search of mustard seeds, Shakyamuni freed and restored peace to the heart of this woman who had been wrapped up in her own grief. He helped her awaken to a deeper wisdom based on the eternity of life.

The most important thing is to expand our state of life. When we think only of ourselves, we become increasingly caught up in our small egos, or lesser selves. In contrast, when we work toward a great and all-encompassing objective, for the sake of the Law, the happiness of others, and the welfare of society, we can develop big hearts and bring forth our greater selves through the "wonderful workings of one mind" (OTT, 30). With big hearts, we can savor truly immense happiness. Sufferings that may have once been a heavy burden in a lesser state of life will appear minor, and we are able to calmly rise above them. I hope all of you will lead lives in which you can demonstrate such brilliant, positive proof of the "wonderful workings of one mind."

From a speech at an SGI-USA representatives conference, U.S.A., March 9, 1993.

Note on terminology: "Three thousand realms in a single moment of life" is a philosophical system established by the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai of China based on the Lotus Sutra. The "three thousand realms" indicates the varying aspects that life assumes at each moment. At each moment, life manifests one of the Ten Worlds. Each of these worlds possesses the potential for all ten within itself, thus making one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred worlds possesses the ten factors and operates within each of the three realms of existence, thus making three thousand realms. In other words, all phenomena are contained within a single moment of life, and a single moment of life permeates the three thousand realms of existence, or the entire phenomenal world.

Section 5.2: "Earthly Desires Lead to Enlightenment"

As the principle "earthly desires lead to enlightenment" from The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings indicates, Buddhism enables us to transform all our problems and difficulties into the energy to advance.

Buddhism teaches the principle that "earthly desires lead to enlightenment." To explain this very simply, "earthly desires" refers to suffering and the desires and cravings that cause suffering, while "enlightenment" refers to happiness and an enlightened state of life.

Normally, one would assume that earthly desires and enlightenment are separate and independent conditions, especially since suffering would seem to be the exact opposite of happiness. But this is not the case in Nichiren Buddhism, which teaches that only by burning the "firewood" of problems and suffering can we obtain the "flames" of happiness. In other words, by using suffering as fuel, we gain the "light" and "energy" for happiness. And it is by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that we "burn the firewood of earthly desires."

When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, our problems and sufferings all turn into energy for our happiness, into fuel that enables us to keep moving forward in our lives.

The wonderful thing about faith in Nichiren Buddhism is that it enables those who suffer the most to attain the greatest happiness and those who experience the most daunting problems to lead the most wonderful, meaningful lives.

Problems come in all shapes and sizes. You may be dealing with some personal problem, you may be wondering how to help your parents live long and fulfilling lives, or you may be worried about friends who are sick or depressed and wish for their recovery. On a different level, you may be deeply concerned about the issue of world peace or the direction of the world in the 21st century. These are very noble concerns.

Through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, you can turn all these worries and concerns into fuel to propel yourselves forward, you can transform them into life force, into greater depth of character, and into good fortune. I therefore hope you will challenge all kinds of problems, chant abundantly about them, and develop yourselves along the way.

Faith means setting goals and striving to achieve each one. If we view each goal or challenge as a mountain, faith is a process whereby we grow with every mountain climbed.

From Discussions on Youth, published in Japanese in March 1999.

Section 5.4: Creating the Future with the Buddhism of True Cause

Buddhism teaches the principle of cause and effect in our lives, that our present situation is the effect caused by our past actions. Nichiren Buddhism, however, teaches the "true cause," that we are not bound by our past but are always embarking from the present moment into the future.

It often seems that people only begin to seriously consider the nature of cause and effect or what it means to lead a happy life when they experience acute suffering themselves. When all is going smoothly, they tend not to give much thought to the truly important things in life. In that sense, difficulties play a crucial role in helping us lead deeper and more meaningful lives. In fact, that's how we should look at them.

No life is utterly without problems or difficulties. All too often, seemingly happy life circumstances can become a cause of suffering and unhappiness. This is something we come to recognize more and more as we mature in years and experience.

A married couple's happiness, for instance, may be shattered when their child is born with a serious illness. All sorts of unanticipated events can assail us, a sudden economic downturn, a fire or accident, family discord, divorce, difficult personal relationships. They can even sometimes lead to lifelong suffering. It is truly the case that we never know what tomorrow brings. None can declare with certainty that they will never encounter misfortune.

Even those who enjoy security and tranquillity can come to feel that their lives have no meaning as they age. There are still others who always seem to be busily engaged in purposeful endeavors, but are in reality simply trying to escape loneliness and emptiness by doing so, unwilling to reflect on themselves or their lives.

Behind a smile might lie sadness. After pleasure might come emptiness. Problems and suffering are inescapable realities of life. And yet, we must go on living. How, then, should we live? How can we change suffering into true joy? The Buddhism of Nichiren Daishonin has the answer to these important and fundamental questions.

The Daishonin's Buddhism is the Buddhism of true cause. "True cause," also called the mystic principle of the true cause, means that Nichiren Daishonin's Buddhism directly expounds the true cause for enlightenment as Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which is the Law of life and the universe. It teaches a way of Buddhist practice of always moving forward from this moment on based on this fundamental Law.

It is a great, revolutionary teaching. It reveals that Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the fundamental cause for attaining enlightenment and that, by simply embracing the Gohonzon, we can acquire in this lifetime all the practices and virtues of the Buddha. As Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Shakyamuni's practices and the virtues he consequently attained are all contained within the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo. If we believe in these five characters, we will naturally be granted the same benefits as he was" (WND-1, 365).

The Daishonin's Buddhism focuses on the present and the future. Its essence is for us to always keep advancing while looking toward and brightly illuminating the future.

Practicing this Buddhism doesn't mean that problems and suffering disappear. The reality of life is that, within any of the Ten Worlds, the other nine are always present, hence, the nine worlds characterized by delusion and suffering also exist within the world of Buddhahood. Likewise, the world of Buddhahood can only express itself within the reality of the other nine worlds. The Ten Worlds are the realms of hell, hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human beings, heavenly beings, voice-hearers, cause-awakened ones, bodhisattvas, and Buddhas. They are also referred to as the ten life states of hell, hunger, animality, anger, humanity, heaven, learning, realization, bodhisattva, and Buddhahood.

The important thing is to remain undaunted when difficulties arise, to firmly believe that they are expressions of the Buddha's compassion and forge ahead with even stronger faith.

Some may weakly succumb to doubt and question why they still have problems even though they are practicing the Daishonin's Buddhism. But such a weak way of thinking will, in accord with the principle of "three thousand realms in a single moment of life," come to permeate every aspect of their lives and create a state of even greater suffering. This is the opposite of having strong faith.

As ordinary people, we may not be able to fathom why a particular event happens at a particular time, but over the long term we will come to understand its meaning. We will also be able to positively transform the situation, changing poison into medicine. I can say this with complete confidence based on my personal experience of more than four decades of Buddhist practice. We may not understand the significance of a certain event until five or ten years later, or it may even take a lifetime. However, from the perspective of the eternity of life spanning the three existences, everything has meaning as an expression of the Buddha wisdom.

From a speech at a nationwide youth division leaders meeting, Tokyo, April 29, 1988.

Section 5.5: Living with Joy throughout All

In this selection, President Ikeda emphasizes that living with joy is the hallmark of a genuine practitioner.

Leo Tolstoy exclaimed: "Rejoice! Rejoice! The business of life, its purpose, is joy. Rejoice at the sky, the sun, the stars, the grass, the trees, animals, people." This is from Tolstoy's Diaries, a September 15, 1889 entry.

"Rejoice!" that was one of the ultimate conclusions the great Russian writer and thinker reached in life.

Living with joy throughout all is the hallmark of a lofty state of being, of strength and happiness. A life that greets everything with criticism and complaint is miserable, in contrast, no matter how fine it might look from the outside.

In 1901, Tolstoy was excommunicated by the Russian Orthodox Church. He was 72 at the time, already advanced in years. The Church thought that taking this punitive measure would humiliate Tolstoy, who was widely admired around the world. But he was unruffled by the tactics of the Church authorities. He observed their actions with serene dignity.

"Rejoice, rejoice!" His conviction remained unshaken. In fact, he burned with a passionate fighting spirit.

Tolstoy's life was not untroubled. He struggled with his writing, with unhappiness in his family life, and with illness. But his spirit always and everywhere sought out and created joy.

This is also the Buddhist way of life. I hope you will all lead lives of pursuing and creating joy.

Nichiren Daishonin declared: "Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the greatest of all joys" (OTT, 212). A life dedicated to kosen-rufu is a life of supreme joy. He also wrote:

I feel immeasurable delight even though I am now an exile. (WND-1, 386)

The more the government authorities rage against me, the greater is my joy. (WND-1, 243)

The greater the hardships befalling [the votary of the Lotus Sutra], the greater the delight he feels, because of his strong faith. (WND-1, 33)

And at the time of the Tatsunokuchi Persecution, the Daishonin said to his loyal disciple Shijo Kingo, who accompanied him: "What greater joy could there be?" (WND-1, 767). "You should smile!" he was telling him.

When hardships occur, the Daishonin taught, "The wise will rejoice while the foolish will retreat" (WND-1, 637).

The more challenges we face, the more joyfully we should move forward and the more determinedly we should tackle them, this is the essence of Nichiren Buddhism and the most valuable way to lead our lives.

A joyless life is miserable. Those who are put off by everything, who are always negative, wear pained expressions, and do nothing but criticize and complain, are not living as the Daishonin teaches in his writings.

Those who can find joy in everything, who can transform everything into joy, are genuine experts in the art of living.

In "Letter from Sado" the Daishonin writes: "Worthies and sages are tested by abuse" (WND-1, 303). Truly great individuals are distinguished by their ability to endure criticism and abuse and calmly lead joyful lives.

Finding joy in everything, when you brim with joy, you will lift the spirits of those around you, bring smiles to people's faces, and create value.

It is vital above all that leaders constantly think about how they can enable everyone to advance with joy.

From a speech at a divisional representatives meeting, Tokyo, June 28, 1993.

Section 5.6: Both Suffering and Joy Are a Part of Life

As Nichiren Daishonin explains in a letter to his disciple Shijo Kingo, who was facing many difficulties, we should strive calmly to overcome every obstacle, unswayed by immediate events, and develop a state of supreme happiness.

I would like to share a Gosho passage that I'm sure all of you are very familiar with. It is from a letter of encouragement the Daishonin sent to Shijo Kingo, who found himself in difficult circumstances. Kingo had incurred his lord's disfavor by trying to convert him to the Daishonin's teaching, an act that also invited hostility from his fellow samurai retainers. The Daishonin writes to him:

"Suffer what there is to suffer, enjoy what there is to enjoy. Regard both suffering and joy as facts of life, and continue chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, no matter what happens. How could this be anything other than [experiencing] the boundless joy of the Law? Strengthen your power of faith more than ever." (WND-1, 681)

Right now, your life may be filled with suffering. But just as pleasure never lasts forever, neither does suffering. In life, there is both suffering and joy. Sometimes we win, and other times we lose. Both suffering and joy are a part of life; this is life's reality. That is why, whether experiencing suffering or joy, we should keep chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, just as we are, says the Daishonin. If we do that, we will attain a state of supreme happiness through the wisdom and power of the Mystic Law. We can lead a life in which nothing will defeat us.

The Daishonin uses the phrase "experiencing the boundless joy of the Law." "Experiencing" here means that we obtain and savor this joy ourselves. It comes down to us, not others. This joy is not bestowed on us by someone else or something outside us. Creating our own happiness and experiencing that happiness for ourselves; developing the inner strength and capacity to serenely enjoy life, regardless of its ups and downs, this is the meaning of "experiencing the boundless joy of the Law." The power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to do this.

For that reason, we don't need to compare ourselves with others. We should simply live in a way that is true to ourselves, based on faith in the Gohonzon.

Please advance in good health and with clear goals, while cultivating positive, harmonious relations with those around you. By conducting yourself in this way, you will naturally become the kind of person others admire, are drawn to, and want to get to know. The Mystic Law enables you to utilize your potential to the fullest. When that happens, you can go anywhere and face anything with a sense of confidence and ease. You'll be able to do what you need to do, unswayed by immediate events and circumstances, and lead a life of deep satisfaction, without regrets. That is the mark of a true victor in life.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, April 21, 2005.

Section 5.7: Difficulties Are a Driving Force for Growth

The great life state attained by Nichiren Daishonin, who surmounted a succession of hardships and persecutions, teaches us the importance of turning adversity into the energy to advance.

Nichiren Daishonin's life was a series of hardships and persecutions, including being exiled twice. Some of his disciples questioned where any peace and comfort was to be found in all this. But the Daishonin insisted that difficulties are in fact peace and comfort and in his writings repeatedly made such statements as: "What fortune is mine!" (WND-1, 402); "How delighted I am!" (WND-1, 402); "In future lives I will enjoy immense happiness, a thought that gives me great joy" (WND-1, 287); and "How can such joy possibly be described!" (WND-1, 396). He savored a state of life that he could only describe as "How fortunate, how joyful!" (WND-1, 642).

In the light of the Buddhist scriptures, difficulties are inevitable. The important thing is how we transform them, changing poison into medicine, and use them as the driving force for fresh growth and progress.

There is no point in feeling anxious or lamenting each time the harsh winds of adversity blow. If we have a powerful determination to change everything that happens into a strong "tailwind," we can surely open the way forward.

We of the Soka Gakkai have been able to create a history of tremendous development based on faith that is focused on the present and the future, namely, always looking from the present moment onward and moving forward, ever forward.

Without hardships, there is no true Buddhist practice. Without struggle, there is no genuine happiness. And that would not be real life. There would be no attainment of Buddhahood, either. When we practice the Daishonin's Buddhism with this understanding, we will never reach an impasse.

The power of one's state of life is indeed wondrous. The power of one's inner determination is limitless. In identical situations or circumstances, people can achieve completely different results and lead completely different lives depending upon their life state and their determination.

Those who have a strong resolve to promote our movement for kosen-rufu will see clear blue skies of good fortune appearing rapidly in their lives, stretching ever further and further, as if the wind were sweeping away every dark cloud.

From a speech at a Nagano Prefecture general meeting, Nagano, August 4, 1991.

Section 5.8: Polishing Ourselves through Adversity

President Ikeda explains the significance of hardships we encounter in spite of practicing Buddhism to attain happiness.

Why do we have to endure hardships? The purpose of our Buddhist practice is to attain Buddhahood. Buddhahood is the state of absolute happiness. Though we are practicing Nichiren Buddhism to become happy, why then do we have to overcome obstacles? The reason is that we need to undergo the trials of difficulty to forge and strengthen within us the diamond-like and indestructible "self" of Buddhahood.

The diamond is regarded as the king of gemstones. It is the hardest of all minerals, possessing unmatched brilliance. A symbol of purity, its name derives from the Greek word adamas meaning "unconquerable" or "invincible."

How are diamonds formed? I'm not a scientist, but it is widely known that diamonds, like graphite, are made of carbon. Deep in the earth, this material is subjected to intense heat and pressure until it is transformed into the crystalline structure of a diamond.

This is similar to how we develop ourselves. Only when subjected to the concentrated pressure of hardships and the fierce heat of great adversity will the core of our lives, our deepest self, be transformed into the diamond-like and indestructible life state of Buddhahood. In other words, it is through experiencing hardships that we acquire the "diamond-like body," or the Buddha body, a brightly shining state of absolute happiness as indestructible as a diamond that cannot be crushed by any amount of suffering or delusion.

A smooth and uneventful kind of Buddhist practice without any difficulties cannot truly help us polish and forge our lives. It is only when we withstand the intense heat and pressure of great hardships that we can shine as "champions of life," sparkling like the most perfect of diamonds.

Such a diamond-like state of life shines with a pure, beautiful, and imperishable light. It is solid and indestructible when buffeted by the turbulent tides of society and the obstacles of corrupt and ill-intentioned forces. We can achieve this state of life through earnestly chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and dedicating ourselves to kosen-rufu. Then our lives will forever be one with the Mystic Law, and we can strive for kosen-rufu with complete freedom throughout eternity. By correctly embracing and upholding the Gohonzon, we can become our greatest possible selves, continuing in this supreme state of Buddhahood in lifetime after lifetime.

Please lead brilliant lives that are diamond-like and indestructible. Indeed, may you all become "diamonds" of happiness that sparkle with the radiance of your beautiful hearts. To do so, please never fear hardships. Don't allow yourselves to be defeated by unfounded criticism. Rather, be grateful for all obstacles, because they help you polish and develop yourselves.

Those who show even stronger conviction in faith and engage even more joyfully in Buddhist practice the greater the hardships they encounter will truly live as diamond-like champions.

Please magnificently adorn this precious life with beautiful faith and beautiful friendship. Live out your days spreading the sublime diamond-like light of life far and wide and demonstrating the truth of the teachings and principles of Nichiren Buddhism.

From a speech at a Funabashi leaders meeting, Chiba, July 13, 1987.

Section 5.9: Winter Always Turns to Spring

President Ikeda encourages us to look to the future with confidence and determination.

Nichiren Daishonin writes: "Winter always turns to spring" (WND-1, 536). Those who believe in the Lotus Sutra may seem to be in winter, he says, but winter will definitely give way to spring.

These words of the Daishonin have enabled countless individuals to find their way forward to a springtime of rebirth, a springtime in life. It is one of our eternal guidelines, and its message, without a doubt, will continue to impart boundless hope to billions of people around the world who are searching for true happiness. Let us then consider the infinite compassion of the Daishonin that is embodied in these words.

He wrote them to encourage the lay nun Myoichi. Her husband had been a person of strong faith. After the Tatsunokuchi Persecution, he was stripped of his estate because of his faith in the Daishonin's teachings. Those who are in the right are often persecuted, that is the unfortunate way of our corrupt world, a constant we can observe in every country and every age. While the Daishonin was in exile on Sado, Myoichi's husband died, remaining steadfast in faith to the end of his life. He left behind his wife who was elderly and frail, a son who was ill, and also a daughter.

The Daishonin was very aware of the lay nun's situation. In his letter, he imagined how grieved her husband must have been to leave her and their children behind, worried about what would become of them when he was no longer there, and how he would also have been anxious about the fate of the Daishonin (cf. WND-1, 535-36).

As I mentioned, Myoichi's husband died while the Daishonin was still in exile on Sado, an island of freezing winters from which few exiles returned alive. His heart must have been filled with sorrow and concern for the Daishonin.

Thinking of his courageous disciple who had passed away amid severe hardship, the Daishonin writes:

"Perhaps your husband felt that certainly something would happen and this priest [Nichiren] would become highly respected. When I was exiled [to Sado] contrary to his expectations, he must have wondered how the Lotus Sutra and the ten demon daughters could possibly have allowed it to happen. Were he still living, how delighted he would be to see Nichiren pardoned!" (WND-1, 536)

The ten demon daughters are the ten female protective deities who appear in the "Dharani" (26th) chapter of the Lotus Sutra as the "daughters of rakshasa demons" or the "ten rakshasa daughters." They vow to the Buddha to guard and protect the sutra's votaries. The Daishonin had been pardoned the previous year, in March 1274, and was residing at Minobu when he wrote this letter, "Winter Always Turns to Spring," dated May 1275.

As this passage and other letters indicate, many of the Daishonin's disciples had expected that he would achieve a position of acclaim and honor. In reality, however, his life was filled with endless persecution. He was defamed and ridiculed throughout the land and subjected to unrelenting harassment. Among his followers were some who had expected their own reputations to rise along with the Daishonin's, but when their hopes in this regard were dashed they abandoned their Buddhist practice or joined the ranks of the Daishonin's opponents. They conspired with the authorities and began to maneuver behind the scenes to harm their former teacher and fellow practitioners.

Yet even amid all this, Myoichi's husband remained true and steadfast in his convictions. He must have dreamed of the Daishonin's triumphant return and been angered and pained at the mean-spirited betrayal by some of his followers.

The Daishonin knew what was going on in his disciples' minds. He was fully aware of everything. He refused to compromise in the slightest degree with evil and injustice and confronted persecution head-on.

That is why the Daishonin writes that Myoichi's deceased husband would surely have been delighted and overjoyed at the Daishonin's safe return from Sado, an outcome that no one at the time had expected. This passage powerfully communicates his wish that his faithful follower, who had stood by him through great hardships, could witness his victory and rejoice along with him.

In the same letter, the Daishonin writes that Myoichi's late husband would also have been glad to see that the Daishonin's prediction of a Mongol invasion had come true, affirming the correctness of his assertions. Though foreign invasion, of course, was a tragic event for the country, such a reaction from a disciple was simply a matter of human nature, he points out, "the feelings of ordinary people" (WND-1, 536).

No doubt upon reading this, the lay nun Myoichi felt she could hear the Daishonin's voice saying: "We are united in our joys and sufferings."

The Daishonin's words "winter always turns to spring" are written with regard to the circumstances just described. He is telling her, in effect: "Your husband died in 'winter.' But 'spring' has now arrived. Winter always turns to spring. Live out your life to the fullest. Those who remain true to their convictions are sure to attain Buddhahood. You cannot fail to become happy. Your husband is most certainly watching over you and your family."

In addition, with deep care and compassion, the Daishonin assures Myoichi that he stands ready to look after her children if the time ever arises (cf. WND-1, 536). Such limitless kindness and warm humanity are the lifeblood of the compassionate Buddhism of Nichiren Daishonin. There is not the slightest trace of authoritarianism. How wonderful!

The words "Winter always turns to spring" can also be read as an expression of the Daishonin's own conviction and actual proof, having experienced the spring of victory after weathering the bleakest circumstances during his exile on Sado.

The Daishonin faced persecution after persecution, trials that could not be surmounted without the power of Buddhahood. Ordinarily, someone subject to such ongoing persecution would most likely fall ill, have a nervous breakdown, commit suicide, or end up being killed. The Daishonin, however, triumphed over every adversity. He survived and lived on. For the sake of all humankind, he transmitted the Buddhism of the Three Great Secret Laws for the eternal future of the Latter Day of the Law. We must be deeply aware of his immense compassion in doing so.

The lay nun Myoichi was no doubt profoundly moved by the Daishonin's message calling on his followers to observe his victory of "winter turning into spring" and to adopt it as a model in their own lives.

We also need to attain our own "spring of happiness," not only for ourselves but also for the sake of our fellow members who have striven alongside us for many long years. It is important for us to set an example so that those coming after us can look at us, rejoice, and say: "How wonderful! Those who continue practicing the Daishonin's Buddhism become outstanding people and attain happiness!"

Over the past decade, I have attained a "spring of victory" that no one could have imagined. It is all due to my single-minded commitment to do this for the sake of kosen-rufu and for my fellow members.

Seniors in faith have a responsibility to demonstrate victory, for the sake of their fellow members who have been striving valiantly for kosen-rufu. By victory, of course, I do not mean the external trappings of worldly success or superficial honors. True victory exists in realizing the great uncrowned state of having joyfully and confidently fulfilled one's mission in life, as a human being and as a practitioner of Nichiren Buddhism.

Spring is the time when flowers bloom. But in order to bloom, flowers need the cold of winter. What would happen if there was no winter?

In autumn, plants that bloom in spring prepare to enter a period of dormancy, or recharging. They start saving energy for the coming spring. If there is a sudden warm spell during their dormancy in winter and they are awakened, the buds waiting for spring's arrival start to open before they are ready, and when the winter cold returns, they wither and die. To prevent that from happening, plants will not bloom unless they have fully experienced the cold of winter. This is the "wisdom" of plants that enables them to bloom in spring.

Life and Buddhist practice also follow this principle. A winter of adversity is the time to recharge our batteries and temper ourselves for the arrival of a wonderful spring. In life's winters, the eternal and indestructible energy for attaining Buddhahood is stored up, and life force as vast as the universe is forged. This energy, in addition, grows in response to adversity and hardship. And all who practice the correct teaching of Buddhism will without fail experience the coming of spring.

But if, in the difficult times of life's winters, we try to avoid or doubt the realm in which we strengthen our faith, and as a result we fail to accumulate enough strength and good fortune, we will never get anywhere, nor be able to lead a truly satisfying life. The crucial thing is how we challenge ourselves and how meaningfully we spend our time during life's winters. What matters is how deeply we live with the conviction that spring will definitely arrive. In the realm of nature, the flowering springtime always comes when the time is right. That is the rhythm of life and the universe. But far too many people in the world are still in the midst of winter when they reach the end of their lives. To avoid that fate, we need to align our lives with the rhythm of the universe that calls forth spring. And our Buddhist practice based on faith in the Mystic Law is what enables us to do that.

In that sense, faith in the Mystic Law functions as our wings to eternal happiness. Every time we overcome difficulties, we accumulate good fortune and elevate our state of life. By attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, we are able to soar serenely through the vast skies of life in a state of supreme happiness and fulfillment throughout eternity. This is the teaching of Buddhism and the rhythm of life.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, April 29, 1990.

Section 5.10: The Principle of "Lessening Karmic Retribution"

The principle of lessening karmic retribution represents a radical rethinking of the concept of karma, enabling us to engage positively with adversity through strong faith.

Nichiren Daishonin offered the following encouragement to the Ikegami brothers, Munenaka and Munenaga, who were in the midst of a struggle against serious obstacles: "The blessings gained by practicing the correct teaching [the Mystic Law], however, are so great that by meeting minor sufferings in this life we can change the karma that destines us to suffer terribly in the future" (WND-1, 497).

Through "the blessings gained by practicing the correct teaching," that is, "the blessings obtained by protecting the Law," the grave negative effects of karma that we would otherwise have experienced in the future are transformed and received as minor effects in the present. We need to be deeply convinced of this principle, called "lessening karmic retribution." And, to a degree that accords with the depth of our faith, we can experience its reality in our own lives.

"The blessings obtained by protecting the Law" is a phrase from the Parinirvana Sutra quoted in "Letter to the Brothers" (WND-1, 497). "Lessening karmic retribution" is a term which literally means "transforming the heavy and receiving it lightly" that appears in the Nirvana Sutra. "Heavy" indicates negative karma accumulated over countless lifetimes in the past. As a benefit of protecting the correct teaching of Buddhism, we can experience relatively light karmic retribution in this lifetime, thereby expiating heavy karma that ordinarily would adversely affect us not only in this lifetime, but over many lifetimes to come.

For instance, suppose you meet with an accident, but it is very minor and not a disaster that involves many people. This could be an instance of receiving the effects of negative karma in a lessened form. You can probably think of many similar examples.

In this way, we can clearly see the significance of hardships from the perspective of the eternity of life across the three existences of past, present, and future. In other words, by undergoing hardships, we can transform in this lifetime the cycle of negative causes and effects in our lives and magnificently reveal within us the brilliant, vibrant state of Buddhahood.

The Daishonin discussed these principles of "lessening karmic retribution" and "the blessings obtained by protecting the Law" in terms of his own life in works such as "The Opening of the Eyes" and "Letter from Sado," which he composed while in exile on Sado Island. Though the Buddha of the Latter Day of the Law, the Daishonin strove as an ordinary person to demonstrate, for the sake of his followers into the eternal future of the Latter Day, the reason why we encounter difficulties. He also taught us the essence of "faith for overcoming hardships." This is a crucial guideline both for our personal lives and for the realm of kosen-rufu.

Three years ago, in October 1985, I was hospitalized for the first time in my life, for 10 days. Objectively speaking, I could have collapsed at any moment. After all, I had been working relentlessly for 40 years since joining the Soka Gakkai, and for nearly 30 years since I had inherited the mantle of our organization's leadership from Mr. Toda. I had been pushing myself to the limit, even though when I was younger the doctors had said I probably wouldn't live to see the age of 30. I was constantly on the go. I was always fighting against adversity.

The media made a big fuss about my hospitalization. There were also many unfounded speculations, and some people moved to act against me motivated by self-interest and calculation. But I understood exactly what was going on. Personally, I felt that my illness was a gift arising from the Buddha's great compassion. I was convinced it was teaching me that the time had come to stand up again on my own and start in earnest on completing my work for kosen-rufu.

Now, I thought, is the time to speak the full truth. Now is the time to offer, from every angle, thoroughgoing guidance for the sake of future generations. I resolved that I must convey the Soka Gakkai's true greatness and its profound significance and spirit.

Until then, I thought I had done my utmost to build a solid organization and teach all that had been necessary. But now, with my illness, I pledged to teach 10 or 20 times more and to work 10 or 20 times harder. And I began, and continue, to do so.

What I am saying is that you are bound to encounter obstacles and difficulties in life of one degree or another. But please know that they all derive from the Buddha's compassion, aimed at helping you become strong, like tall, sturdy trees.

With that conviction, please forge ahead as champions of faith, overcoming all challenges and opening the way forward in your lives and for kosen-rufu with ever greater strength, resilience, and joy with each obstacle you face.

From a speech at a nationwide youth division leaders meeting, Tokyo, April 29, 1988.
