Chapter 30: The Future Division, The Treasure of the Soka Gakkai

Section 30.1: Aiming toward the Soka Gakkai's Centennial with the Future Division

Fostering the Future Division members is vital for the ongoing development of the Soka Gakkai and kosen-rufu. Young people who embrace the life-affirming principles of Nichiren Buddhism and grow into future leaders of society are a source of great hope for humankind. This chapter features guidance on fostering the Future Division members, the treasure of the Soka Gakkai, on how we should interact with and nurture them.

Note on terminology: The Future Division refers to the high school division, which President Ikeda established on June 7, 1964; the junior high school division, which he established on January 15, 1965; and the boys and girls division, which he established on September 23, 1965. These three groups are collectively referred to as the Future Division.

In this first selection, President Ikeda stresses how important this undertaking is for the future of kosen-rufu and calls for all members to support the effort of nurturing and empowering successors.

The Soka Gakkai is now advancing dynamically toward its centennial in 2030. The future of every organization and society depends on capable individuals. Fostering the Future Division members, in that respect, is critical in securing the development of the Soka Gakkai. Indeed, it holds the key to the very future of kosen-rufu, and represents the hope for the fulfillment of humanity's earnest wish for an age of peace.

The human revolution we aspire to achieve can also be called a revolution to open the way for the happiness of all children now and in the future.

"No cause, no war is worth depriving children of their natural right to happiness." These were the impassioned words of the Polish pediatrician and educator Janusz Korczak. Refusing to be intimidated by the Nazi invaders during World War II, he strove to shield and protect the children under his care to the very end, ultimately dying with them in a concentration camp.

Around the same time, in Japan, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, the founder of Soka education who likened the life of each child to a "cluster of unsurpassed jewels," died in prison for his opposition to the nation's militarist authorities.

Mr. Makiguchi said of the approach required for humanistic education: "Teachers should come down from the throne where they are ensconced as the object of veneration, to become public servants who instruct those seeking to ascend the throne of learning. They should not be masters who offer themselves as paragons, but companions who guide the way toward the ideal."

It is important that we afford children the highest respect as individuals in their own right. Helping children grow requires total commitment on our part. There is a fine adult inside every child. We need to direct our voices to that inner adult. We must never treat children in a dismissive or condescending manner, assuming they won't understand and thinking it's okay not to fully explain things.

We must believe in children's immense potential and strive to develop their innate capacities as well as our own. The more we broaden our own minds, the more we can inspire and foster others. That is why our own growth is indispensable to our efforts to help others grow.

Second Soka Gakkai president Josei Toda often encouraged us to raise our children in the "garden of the Soka Gakkai."

The "sun" of a culture of peace and the rich "earth" that nourishes the growth of socially engaged individuals are both found in the Soka family. The warmth of the local members and their compassionate concern for the happiness of others cause the buds of peace, hope, and justice to blossom naturally in the hearts of our Future Division members.

My wife, Kaneko, used to take our sons along with her to Soka Gakkai activities when they were young. She would sit with them in front of the Gohonzon and tell them: "Today's meeting is very important." Seeing this, a fellow member once asked whether children that young could really understand what she was telling them. My wife replied: "Yes, they do, without a doubt, because I speak from my heart to their hearts."

The sight of people striving joyfully for the happiness of others and for the welfare of society is engraved unconsciously in the young lives of our Future Division members. Though they may not fully appreciate its significance at the time, they are certain to do so when they get older.

When it comes to child-raising, I'm sure many parents find that things don't always go the way they hope. But don't worry too much and just warmly support and accept your children. Look into their eyes and tell these young "emissaries from the future" that you care about them and trust them.

Believe in your children. Trust them no matter what. That will be an immeasurable source of support and encouragement for them.

In August 1970, as the Soka Gakkai was facing a maelstrom of criticism and abuse due to what is known as the Freedom of Speech Incident, I said to a gathering of high school division representatives: "No matter what difficulties come my way, I feel immense pride in my life and consider myself the most fortunate person because I have you, capable people who will ensure the eternal perpetuation of the Law and serve as the successors of the Soka Gakkai."

Note on terminology: The Freedom of Speech Incident is the name given to a controversy that arose in 1970 when the Soka Gakkai defended itself against libelous claims. For further details, see the "Fierce Winds" chapter of The New Human Revolution, volume 14.

We then read a passage from one of Nichiren Daishonin's writings together: "Strengthen your resolve more than ever. Ice is made of water, but it is colder than water. Blue dye comes from indigo, but when something is repeatedly dyed in it, the color is better than that of the indigo plant" (WND-1, 615).

I said to my young disciples in the Future Division who were destined to become "bluer than the indigo," their achievements certain to exceed my own: "In accord with the principle outlined in this passage, I hope all of you, as successors of the Soka Gakkai, will develop splendidly and surpass our generation. Please demonstrate to the world the validity of the noble Buddhist teachings and principles upheld by the Soka Gakkai, which is the foremost ally of those who are suffering."

By 2030, when today's Future Division members are serving as the core leaders of our movement, birth rates worldwide are predicted to be in steady decline. In that sense, the efforts all of you are making today at the local level to foster immensely capable individuals will contribute to opening a more secure future for the world as a whole as well.

In my travels around the globe, I have always taken every spare moment I could to meet with and encourage Future Division members, many of whom have gone on to become youth division leaders in their respective countries. There is nothing I look forward to more than hearing about the activities of Future Division members who continue to grow and advance vibrantly around the world.

My heart fills with excitement when I imagine what it will be like in 2030, when today's Future Division members will be striving for world peace as proud heirs to the Soka Gakkai spirit, sharing the hopes and aspirations of ordinary people everywhere, and doing their utmost to encourage and support them.

Envisaging that brilliant future, I will continue my efforts to encourage the Future Division members and pray for their happiness alongside the sincere members who, sharing my spirit as their own, are earnestly working to nurture these precious young treasures.

From an essay series "Our Brilliant Path to Victory," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, August 21 and 22, 2012.

Section 30.3: What Should We Pass On to the Future Division?

President Ikeda emphasizes that fostering Future Division members to become successors of our movement of human revolution and kosen-rufu is the key to creating a secure future for humanity.

In "On the Buddha's Prophecy," Nichiren Daishonin stresses the importance of successors, asserting that without people who "embrace and teach," or transmit, the Buddhist teachings, Buddhism will become as lifeless as "wooden or stone statues garbed in priests' robes and carrying begging bowls." The undeniable reality is that no group or organization will endure without people who uphold and pass on its ideals, in other words, without successors.

The simile of the meaninglessness of wooden or stone statues dressed in priests' robes highlights a unique characteristic of Buddhism. That is, without people to carry on and spread it, its spirit will be lost, even though its teachings and images may survive. Buddhism only remains alive and vital through real, living people carrying on the teachings in their actions.

From that perspective, our Future Division members have an incredibly important mission as people who will "embrace and teach" the Mystic Law.

Fostering Future Division members is creating a bright tomorrow. Let us warmly nurture the rich and vast potential of these emissaries from the future in the garden of the Soka Gakkai, a realm of unsurpassed humanism. Fostering and supporting successors who embrace Nichiren Buddhism and advancing kosen-rufu are key to realizing the Daishonin's ideal of "establishing the correct teaching for the peace of the land." Doing so is the direct path to building a just society and actualizing world peace.

Let's now take a closer look at the meaning of "embrace and teach." What is it that Future Division members will embrace and convey to future generations? Conversely, what is it that we should help these emissaries from the future embrace, and what should we teach or pass on to them?

The answer is the faith and practice of Nichiren Buddhism taught in the Soka Gakkai that they learn from their family members at home. In other words, it is the eternal and indestructible Law expounded in Buddhism, the principles and tenets of human equality and respect for the dignity of life.

In more concrete terms, embracing and teaching others about Buddhism means each individual believing in the infinite potential of their own life and continuing to make efforts in their human revolution.

One person's human revolution can transform their family and those around them, spreading understanding and empathy that can even bring change to their community and society at large. Expanding this movement for human revolution throughout the world and ensuring that it endures is the meaning of kosen-rufu. Those who "embrace and teach" Buddhism are none other than the successors of this movement.

The Daishonin says that he is always praying for his dear disciple Shijo Kingo, firmly convinced he is "a person who can inherit the soul of the Lotus Sutra" (WND-1, 839). People who qualify as "inheriting the soul of the Lotus Sutra" are disciples who, taking the Daishonin's words deeply to heart, battle adversity based on the Mystic Law, just as the Daishonin did. The "soul of the Lotus Sutra" is the teaching of universal enlightenment that is the sutra's essence. "A person who can inherit the soul of the Lotus Sutra" is therefore someone who dedicates their life to propagating this principle. Disciples who stand up with the same great vow and spirit as the Daishonin can ensure the eternal transmission of the Law.

That is why, the Daishonin says, he continues to pray earnestly for the triumph of such disciples. The triumph of the disciple is the triumph of the mentor and of Buddhism.

From a lecture series "The Buddhism of the Sun, Illuminating the World," published in Japanese in the Daibyakurenge, August 2019.

Section 30.4: Be Good Friends to the Future Division Members

President Ikeda has frequently offered encouragement and advice for those supporting the development and growth of the Future Division members. In this selection, he urges them to always be friends to the Future Division members.

Fostering others contributes to our own growth. Teaching others makes us wiser. Learning together with our Future Division members, developing and advancing together with them, is a path of lifelong youthfulness, giving us fresh zest and vitality.

The 21st Century Mission Group, comprising Future Division leaders from the youth division in Japan, was established on July 17, 1995. At that time, I asked these leaders to be friends to the Future Division members.

Buddhism describes a person who exerts a positive influence on another as a "good friend." Nichiren Daishonin states: "The best way to attain Buddhahood is to encounter a good friend" (WND-1, 598).

By doing activities together with the Future Division members as supportive older brothers and sisters with whom they can talk about anything, the division's leaders are fulfilling their mission as good friends.

I'm sure these youth leaders all have their own problems and challenges, be it at work or in their daily lives, and are striving to do their best in the face of untold hardships. But the Future Division members are watching their earnest efforts closely. They will deeply take to heart the sincere words of such leaders.

I often receive letters from members telling me how grateful they are for the past support and encouragement of a senior in faith, saying that it played a formative role in their life.

It doesn't matter whether our efforts are met with applause or praise from others. Unseen virtue in the form of dedicating ourselves for others' happiness adorns our lives with visible reward and brings immeasurable good fortune and benefit to our families for generations to come.

From an essay series "Our Brilliant Path to Victory," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, August 9, 2011.

Section 30.6: Life Itself Is a Treasure

In this selection, President Ikeda stresses that valuing life is the heart of true humanistic education and the most essential point we should pass on to Future Division members.

One of the most respected figures in Okinawan history is the great philosopher-statesman Saion, who, in the 18th century, laid the foundations for the golden age of the Ryukyu Kingdom, which is present-day Okinawa. A person of remarkable insight into the human condition, Saion told the following story of an elderly man encouraging a young boy:

One day, a young Okinawan boy said proudly to an old man: "I have a sword that has been handed down in my family for generations. I polish it every single day without fail!"

The old man asked: "Do you have any treasure other than this sword?"

"No, I don't."

"That sword is just a small treasure," the old man said quietly. "You actually have the most wonderful treasure of all: It is you, yourself."

The old man was trying to suggest that the boy should polish the treasure that is his own life with the same diligence. The boy was deeply moved by the old man's words and grateful for this important lesson.

This story also resonates with the teachings of Buddhism. The most fundamental point to which we must always return is ourselves. It is life itself. This is what I want to stress.

To live with dignity as human beings and reveal the full shining potential of our humanity, nothing can surpass this. Only in this way can we realize genuine human happiness, peace, and coexistence with the natural world. This should be the purpose of all scientific and technological progress as well.

As we stand on the threshold of the 21st century, we must reaffirm this basic truth, we must return to the most essential point, the human being.

Life itself is a treasure. This philosophy is cherished by the Okinawan people. This respect for life is also the foundation of humanistic education.

Because life is precious, taking human life is absolutely wrong, waging war is absolutely wrong. This is a simple yet cardinal principle. It is vital that we solemnly pass this on to the next generation, the generation that will shape the 21st century.

Other than this, we should do our best to support and foster the Future Division members with a warm, broad-minded spirit so that they can develop their potential as freely and fully as possible.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, July 18, 2000.

Section 30.7: Passing On Faith to the Next Generation

In this excerpt, President Ikeda describes how he and his wife, Kaneko, passed on their faith to their sons when they were young.

Our children learned the basics of faith in the meetings of what is now known as the Future Division.

I was serving as acting chapter leader of Bunkyo Chapter in Tokyo, so my three sons joined in activities there and received kind support and care from the Bunkyo members. When my eldest son was in elementary and junior high school, he often used to go from our home in Ota Ward to meetings in Bunkyo Ward with his two younger brothers in tow.

There were times, however, when they didn't want to take part in Soka Gakkai activities. When that happened, my wife used to say to them: "However much fun you have when you are playing, you have nothing to show for it afterward. But it's different with Soka Gakkai meetings. You may not want to go at the time, but afterward you're happy that you did." It seems our children came to understand that point as time went by.

In 1970, when my sons were 17, 15, and 12, I was being fiercely attacked and insulted from all sides due to the Freedom of Speech Incident. In fact, my life has been defined by this kind of persecution, which always arises when one works for kosen-rufu; it's something I was prepared for. The only thing that troubled me was the effect it might have on my family, but my wife was always very calm and composed. "If you live according to the writings of Nichiren Daishonin," she would say, "persecution is only to be expected." She never lost her smile.

Apparently, my sons often encountered negative comments about the Soka Gakkai at school. I said to them: "People who try to live true to their convictions and accomplish great things in life invariably encounter criticism and attack. Don't be defeated by such adversity." I always tried to show them, through my own example, what it meant to lead a life of conviction.

Kosen-rufu extends "horizontally" through growing networks of friends and "vertically" through the transmission of faith from parent to child, from one generation to the next. The only way forward is to entrust the future to the younger generation.

From an essay series "Thoughts on The New Human Revolution," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, January 6, 1998.

Section 30.8: Children Are Our Treasures

Touching upon his experience as the editor in chief of a children's magazine when he was young, President Ikeda expresses his limitless hopes and expectations for future generations.

When I was 21, Mr. Toda appointed me editor in chief of a magazine called Boys' Adventure, which was later renamed Boys' Japan. I resolved to make the magazine the best in Japan, putting all my youthful energy into the task. I adored kids and wanted to impart courage and hope to them.

Envisaging the vibrant potential of young people, I wrote in my diary at that time: "We must consider them the treasures of our nation, for they are builders of the society to come." I fervently believe this to this day.

Praising the son of his disciples Abutsu-bo and the lay nun Sennichi, Nichiren Daishonin writes: "There is no treasure greater than a child!" (WND-1, 1045). Their son, Tokuro Moritsuna, had grown into a fine successor and, like his father, traveled long distances from Sado Island to Mount Minobu to visit the Daishonin. He decided to follow the path of highest good alongside his great mentor, just as his parents had taught him.

The realization of kosen-rufu will be nothing but an empty dream unless we create a great river of transmission, unceasingly passing on the correct teaching of Buddhism from one generation to the next, from parents to children and on to grandchildren. Each child is the treasure of their family, of society, and of the world. Indeed, children are treasures of the future, of humanity, and irreplaceable treasures of Soka. That's why it is so important to transmit the true spirit of faith, of the Soka Gakkai, to our children. That is our responsibility to the future.

How do we nurture people of promise? How do we help them develop their fresh and vibrant potential? The fate of the 21st century hinges on these questions.

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, April 1, 2006.

Section 30.10: The Growth of Future Division Members Holds the Key to Victory

President Ikeda reflects on how he poured his energy into fostering the Future Division members during a period when the Soka Gakkai was facing harsh criticism, always keeping his sights set firmly on the future.

Looking back at the history of Buddhism, Nichiren Daishonin notes: "Even when Buddhist priests set out from Japan to take some sutras back to China, no one was found there who could embrace these sutras and teach, or transmit, them to others. It was as though there were only wooden or stone statues garbed in priests' robes and carrying begging bowls" (WND-1, 401).

The only way to perpetuate the correct teachings and principles of Buddhism into the future is to continually foster those who will embrace, practice, and pass them on to others.

In 1966, I held a series of lectures for high school division members on the Daishonin's writings. I gave my absolute all to the task, and together we studied the following passages from "Letter from Sado":

"Only by defeating a powerful enemy can one prove one's real strength. When an evil ruler in consort with priests of erroneous teachings tries to destroy the correct teaching and do away with a man of wisdom, those with the heart of a lion king are sure to attain Buddhahood" (WND-1, 302).

"Iron, when heated in the flames and pounded, becomes a fine sword. Worthies and sages are tested by abuse" (WND-1, 303).

It has been, and always will be, the tradition of Soka mentors and disciples to engrave these golden words in their hearts. It has been so ever since the time of Soka Gakkai founding president Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, who laid down his life for his beliefs.

I was determined that our movement would come into its own in the 21st century.

In 1970, shortly after our May 3 Soka Gakkai Headquarters general meeting, held amid criticism resulting from the Freedom of Speech Incident, I gave a press conference at which several journalists asked deliberately provocative and disparaging questions about the Soka Gakkai's future.

I replied: "Please wait and see how the Soka Gakkai develops in the 21st century! We'll have a steady stream of outstanding individuals who are making great contributions to society. That will be the proof of my victory!"

The growth of our Future Division and youth division members would guarantee the Soka Gakkai's successful development. Firm in that belief, I withstood every attack and opened the great path for truth and justice.

There are now, as of 2008, some 35,000 noble Bodhisattvas of the Earth striving for kosen-rufu in India, the birthplace of Buddhism. Some 40 percent of them are youth division members, and of those, an impressive 30 percent belong to the Future Division.

Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth refers to an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

As of February 2023, the membership of Bharat, or India, Soka Gakkai exceeds 275,000, over half of which are members of the youth division and Future Division.

One can always find Future Division members, brimming with the mentor-disciple spirit, actively taking part in discussion meetings by performing skits and contributing in other ways. I have heard that many older members, moved by the inspiring examples of these young people, are applying themselves to Buddhist study with ever greater joy and enthusiasm.

Teaching the "courage of a lion king" (WND-1, 997) to our precious lion cubs of the Future Division is the way to ensure the ongoing development of kosen-rufu.

Behold! The time has now come when my youthful disciples are vibrantly active on the grand stage of the 21st century. I have won! The Soka Gakkai, too, has triumphed and will continue to do so forever, thanks to the lionlike spirit of courageous young disciples.

From an essay series "The Light of the Century of Humanity," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, February 17, 2008.

Section 30.11: Toward the Soka Gakkai's 200th Anniversary

President Ikeda looks toward the year 2030, when today's Future Division members will not only take the lead in celebrating the 100th anniversary of the Soka Gakkai, but also take the first steps toward the organization's 200th anniversary.

The future! This is a central theme of the Lotus Sutra.

The sutra describes Shakyamuni and Many Treasures, and the Buddhas of the 10 directions who are emanations of Shakyamuni, as having gathered to enable all living beings of future ages to attain enlightenment.

Nichiren Daishonin writes in "The Opening of the Eyes": "Shakyamuni, Many Treasures, and the other Buddhas intend to insure the future propagation of the Lotus Sutra so that it can be made available to all the children of the Buddha in times to come. We may surmise from this that their concern and compassion are even greater than those of a father and mother who see their only child inflicted with great suffering" (WND-1, 286-87).

The Lotus Sutra pulses with the fervent wish of the Buddha to spread the Mystic Law so that all those of future ages may lead lives of genuine happiness. This same ardent desire underlies our ceaseless prayers and exhaustive, all-out efforts to foster the Future Division members.

Our sole desire is to help every young person become an outstanding individual who will contribute greatly to the development of kosen-rufu, and to support them as they flourish and grow in the garden of the Soka Gakkai. We seek nothing in return, simply striving to encourage them in any way we can, with the earnest wish that they will lead lives of great mission and achievement.

This spirit resonates with the very heart and essence of the Lotus Sutra, and it is also why young Bodhisattvas of the Earth are joyfully emerging in ever-growing numbers in response to our call.

Dedicated efforts sometimes produce immediate results, but sometimes they do not. And some dreams are so big and far-reaching that they cannot be achieved by one person in a single lifetime.

We of the Soka Gakkai, however, are able to exert ourselves fully today, confident that our movement for kosen-rufu will show wonderful development 30 or 50 years from now. Why? Because we have successors, our Future Division members. Because we have you, my young friends, who will carry on the momentous task of building a peaceful and humane world.

My dear Future Division members! My precious friends! You are destined to be the noble protagonists of our movement when the Soka Gakkai celebrates its glorious 100th anniversary in 2030.

At that time, you, our present boys and girls division members, will have grown to be fine young adults, ranging in age from 25 to 31. When I was around that age, I traveled tirelessly all over Japan representing my mentor, second Soka Gakkai President Toda, and achieved one victory after another for kosen-rufu. I look back on that time of my youth with great pride.

In 2030, you, our present junior high school division members, will be around the same age I was when I succeeded Mr. Toda as Soka Gakkai president at age 32 and traveled to countries around the world, embarking on my great struggle for peace.

And I am confident that, in 2030, you, today's high school division members, will be active as "torchbearers of justice," playing leading roles in every sphere of society.

I was 36 years old when I established the first of the divisions that now comprise the Future Division. I did so with the intent of building an indestructible bastion of Soka. It is truly exciting to think of all the doors you will open when you reach that age, doors to a wonderful new future. And I am sure you will joyously set out together from there on a journey toward the Soka Gakkai's 200th anniversary in 2130.

Mr. Toda stated with supreme confidence: "The struggle we are waging now is for the sake of 100 years, 200 years hence. Two centuries from now, history will show that we of the Soka Gakkai have been on the right path. Future generations will attest to it beyond doubt."

From an essay series "Our Brilliant Path to Victory," published in Japanese in the Seikyo Shimbun, July 27, 2011.
