Conclusion: Toward the Future

In this concluding section, we present excerpts in which President Ikeda sets forth his thoughts and vision for the future.

Section 1: A New Series of Seven Bells toward the Year 2050

In 2001, the Soka Gakkai launched the second series of Seven Bells - the second of seven seven-year periods of development in its movement for kosen-rufu through to the year 2050. In this message commemorating May 3, Soka Gakkai Day, 2001, President Ikeda discusses the significance of these Seven Bells, and affirms his commitment to expanding the Soka Gakkai's network of global citizens and building an unshakable foundation for world peace.

Note on terminology: The first series of Seven Bells are seven consecutive seven-year periods in the Soka Gakkai's development from its founding in 1930 through 1979. On May 3, 1958, shortly after President Toda's death on April 2, President Ikeda, then Soka Gakkai youth division chief of staff, introduced this idea and announced targets for subsequent seven-year periods. On May 3, 1966, President Ikeda spoke of a new series of Seven Bells that he envisaged unfolding in the 21st century. Also, in 1978, just before the end of the first series of Seven Bells, he elaborated further on this second series of Seven Bells, stating that it would begin from May 3, 2001 and continue through 2050. He also announced a series of four five-year goals for the organization's development during the 20-year period from 1980 through 2000.

We have made a powerful fresh start toward the year 2030, the Soka Gakkai's centennial, and also set forth on a new, second series of Seven Bells.

Let us press forward, making every seven years and every decade a momentous milestone of victory and hope. First of all, let's aim to triumphantly celebrate these milestones leading up to the year 2030:

May 3, 2008, when the first bell ends.

May 3, 2010, the year of the Soka Gakkai's 80th anniversary.

May 3, 2015, when the second bell ends.

May 3, 2020, the year of the Soka Gakkai's 90th anniversary.

May 3, 2022, when the third bell ends.

May 3, 2029, when the fourth bell ends.

May 3, 2030, the year of the Soka Gakkai's 100th anniversary.

The year 2050, meanwhile, will be a double milestone as we celebrate the Soka Gakkai's 120th anniversary and the end of the second series of Seven Bells.

At that time, members of the first class of Soka University of America, which opened in May 2001, and current members of the Soka Gakkai student and future divisions will be close to the age I am today. To foster young people is to create a new future. I look forward to the dynamic contributions of our young men and women in every sphere of society.

In "On Repaying Debts of Gratitude," the Daishonin writes: "If Nichiren's compassion is truly great and encompassing, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo will spread for ten thousand years and more, for all eternity" (WND-1, 736). You all have the noble mission to be the source from which kosen-rufu flows onward into the distant future.

Viewed from the broader context of history, Nichiren Daishonin appeared in the world some 700 years after Buddhism was transmitted to Japan from Korea. It was also 700 years after the time of the Great Teacher T'ien-t'ai of China. The Daishonin writes: "Now, more than 700 years after Buddhism was introduced to Japan... the great Law Nam-myoho-renge-kyo never heard of in previous ages is spreading throughout Japan. How reassuring it is to know that not only the people here, but those of India, China, and the entire land of Jambudvipa, the entire world, will be able to attain Buddhahood!" (WND-1, 482)

The Soka Gakkai was founded some 700 years after the Daishonin waged his struggle to propagate the Mystic Law, and it is now making his prediction of worldwide kosen-rufu a reality. Were it not for the Soka Gakkai, the Lotus Sutra and the Daishonin's writings would all have been rendered false.

The start of each 700-year period has invariably signaled a time for protecting the lifeblood of the correct teaching of Buddhism - a task that can only be achieved through a colossal struggle of faith.

The Daishonin cites a passage from the Nirvana Sutra stating that 700 years after Shakyamuni's passing, the devil king will assume the form of a sage or Buddha and attempt to destroy the correct teachings of Buddhism (cf. WND-1, 726).

Following that same principle, 700 years after the Daishonin's passing, corrupt priests embodying the workings of the devil king appeared and plotted to destroy the correct teaching of Buddhism. The Soka Gakkai, however, fought resolutely against them and won.

With ever stronger unity of purpose that is a model for all, let us now confidently ring in a new series of Seven Bells at the start of the 21st century.

The Soka Gakkai brought the first series of Seven Bells, beginning from the organization's founding in 1930, to a triumphant close. And then last year, the year 2000, we celebrated the Soka Gakkai's 70th anniversary. We can honestly say that 700 years of history have been distilled into those 70 years of victorious struggle.

The amount of daimoku our members have chanted in those seven decades, the number of people they have helped form a connection with Nichiren Buddhism, and the good fortune they have accumulated are truly astronomical.

Today, the Soka Gakkai shines with countless capable individuals and is brimming with infinite energy.

We now begin a new series of Seven Bells, our sights set on the year 2050. This will be a time for us to further expand our network of global citizens and build an unshakable foundation for peace in Asia and throughout the world.

When each of us powerfully awakens to our mission, the bells of peace will resound forth. When we persevere in our earnest spiritual struggle, the bells proclaiming the victory of justice will ring out far and wide.

From a message sent to a nationwide prefecture leaders conference, Tokyo, April 26, 2001.

Section 2: Determinations for the Future into the 23rd Century

President Ikeda shares his hopes and vision for the movement for kosen-rufu from the 21st century onward into the 22nd and 23rd centuries. He explains that they are not "prophecies," but personal determinations toward realizing a world where respect for the dignity of life and lasting peace prevail.

Our sights are set on the 21st century, the 22nd century, the 23rd century, and on the eternal future of the Latter Day of the Law.

The first half of the 21st century will mark the second series of Seven Bells. I envisage this being a time for consolidating the groundwork for peace in Asia and throughout the world.

Looking further ahead to the latter half of the 21st century - with our aim of making it a "century of life" - I trust that respect for the dignity of life will be established as the underlying spirit of the age and of the world.

Now, feeling that I have a pretty clear vision of how kosen-rufu will develop in the 21st century, I am turning my attention toward the 22nd. During the first half of the 22nd century, I expect that an indestructible foundation for lasting world peace will be laid. And on that foundation, in the latter half of the century, I picture a brilliant flowering of human culture.

The midpoint of the 23rd century, meanwhile, will mark the millennial anniversary of Nichiren Buddhism. I conceive this as signaling the start of a brilliant new phase in our movement.

These are, of course, not "prophesies." Rather, they are my determinations for the future arising from my wholehearted prayers for peace.

Because working for kosen-rufu is a long-term undertaking spanning the eternal future of the Latter Day of the Law, the correct way for us to proceed is to strive to win in the present, while also maintaining a longer perspective of 50- or 100-year periods. I am taking various steps now for the sake of the distant future.

What will the future be like? No one knows the answer to that question. All we know is that the effects that will appear in the future are all contained in the causes we make in the present. The important thing, therefore, is that we stand up with a lofty purpose in our hearts, unswayed by our short-term circumstances.

All of us who are now striving for kosen-rufu with unshakable conviction are, in reality, creating the 21st, 22nd, 23rd centuries. Moreover, we are engraving in our lives the causes that will enable us to rejoin the struggle for kosen-rufu at that time.

From a speech at a Kansai representatives conference, Osaka, May 17, 1997.

Section 3: Making Respect for the Dignity of Life the Spirit of the 21st Century

At a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting exactly one month after the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks in the United States, President Ikeda stresses that dialogue is the only sure way to establish respect for the dignity of life as the underlying spirit of the 21st century and beyond, and to secure kosen-rufu and world peace into the future.

Humanity's future is still in peril. The only real way to break through the darkness is for human beings themselves to change. With our grand vision for the 21st century, let us ring the bells of eternal peace, of kosen-rufu, steadily and resolutely, one after another!

The world at peace and all humanity living together in harmony is the dream and hope of the 21st century. The surest first step toward realizing that goal is for human beings to reach out and engage in dialogue that transcends all differences.

There is a key line in Nichiren Daishonin's treatise "On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land": "Let us discuss the question at length" (WND-1, 7). The host is inviting his guest to engage in a dialogue. The Daishonin always highly valued one-to-one dialogue, and the treatise itself is structured as a dialogue between the host and his guest. This writing is the starting point for peace. It is said that Nichiren Buddhism begins and ends with "On Establishing the Correct Teaching for the Peace of the Land." And dialogue is the backbone of this important work. It is through one-to-one dialogue that individuals form bonds of genuine trust. Neither military force nor political coercion hold any answers.

People coming together without prejudice and transcending national and ethnic differences - our organization is truly a model of that ideal. Just look at the international gathering we are holding today, with so many friends from diverse lands. What we need to do is expand this. We are promoting dialogue for peace throughout the world. We are conducting dialogue with people of different cultures and traditions.

I personally have engaged in more than 1,500 dialogues with leading thinkers from countries all around the globe, starting with the British historian Arnold Toynbee. Moreover, my dialogues with some 40 of these individuals have either been published or are in the process of being published, with the aim of fostering international understanding.

The Soka Gakkai's movement for peace is striving through dialogue to establish the philosophy of respect for the dignity of life as the spirit of the age in the 21st century. The dialogues you engage in each day are noble and important. I hope you will continue them with supreme confidence and pride.

From a speech at a Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting, Tokyo, October 11, 2001.

Section 4: Standing Always on the Side of the People

Discussing their vision for the future, President Ikeda and British historian Arnold J. Toynbee agreed that the Middle Way is the path that humanity must follow. Here, President Ikeda elaborates on the significance of the Middle Way and articulates the eternal mission of the Soka Gakkai.

I visited the great British historian Arnold Toynbee at his London home in 1972 and 1973, talking with him at length. He was 84 and I was 45. Our earnest discussions encompassed such topics as overcoming self-centeredness and transcending the limitations of nationalism, as well as numerous other important issues confronting humankind.

Toward the end of our dialogue in 1973, I asked him if he had any personal advice for me. He prefaced his reply with the words "I think it rather impertinent for me to give personal advice to you, because I am an academic person and you are a man of action." He then went on: "I think we agree about what a human being should do with his life. The Middle Way - as you yourself have said - is the way to follow."

The Middle Way is the way of humanism based on the Buddhist principle of respect for the dignity of life. It is to take a gradualist approach, always advancing with and for the people.

Professor Toynbee continued: "I'm sure that the Soka Gakkai is looking very far ahead. This is what we all should do."

It is now more than a decade since we entered the 21st century, and Professor Toynbee's words have acquired ever greater weight. As the times grow more confused, the need for the Middle Way, in which we never lose sight of what is most fundamental and important, is increasingly urgent.

Buddhist humanism means always standing on the side of the people. This is the true path of Nichiren Buddhism. Working for the happiness of others and sincerely valuing the person right in front of us require having limitless faith in the highest positive potential inherent within each individual. Such faith and conviction are the driving force for building a network of hope and opening the way to a brighter future.

From Learning from the Writings of Nichiren Daishonin: The Teachings for Victory, vol. 14, published in Japanese in March 2015.

Section 5: The Soka Gakkai Will Always Open a Way Forward

President Ikeda stresses the transformative power of Nichiren Buddhism, pointing to the Daishonin's assurance that the most troubled age signals the arrival of a time of fresh hope when the correct teaching will flourish. He asserts that the Soka Gakkai, its members united in the spirit of oneness of mentor and disciple, will find a way forward through every obstacle or challenge.

Note on terminology: Saha world means this world, which is full of suffering. Often translated as the world of endurance. In Sanskrit, saha means the earth; it derives from a root meaning "to bear" or "to endure." For this reason, in the Chinese versions of Buddhist scriptures, saha is rendered as endurance. In this context, the saha world indicates a world in which people must endure suffering.

A society's growth and development depend upon the ideals and philosophies valued by the people who make up that society.

The society of Nichiren Daishonin's day refused to recognize the truths he presented. It condoned slander of the Law, which brought suffering upon the people. In accepting the teachings of erroneous Buddhist schools that either ignored or made an empty pretense of working for people's happiness, it could not hope to develop and prosper as it rightly should.

But the light of wisdom of the correct teaching of Buddhism shows its true worth in times of great confusion and turmoil. The Daishonin clearly believed that the darkest hour of night was but a prelude to a dawn of people's awakening - an opportunity for change, a turning point. "Great evil portends the arrival of great good" (WND-1, 1122), he writes. He is saying in effect: "There's no need for pessimism. I, Nichiren, possessing the sunlike wisdom of the Buddha, have appeared in response to this dark time. Great evil portends the arrival of the great good of kosen-rufu." How inspired and heartened the Daishonin's followers must have been by his resolute conviction.

The Daishonin also writes: "If all of Jambudvipa, the entire world, were to be thrown into chaos, there could be no doubt that this Lotus Sutra would 'be widely propagated throughout Jambudvipa'" (cf. LSOC28, 363) (WND-1, 1122). Of course, the Daishonin's Buddhism does not by any means advocate a doomsday vision. Rather, its aim is to put an end to people's suffering and enable them to attain happiness in the real world. Precisely because the Latter Day of the Law is a time of seemingly insoluble challenges, we can take action to transform things, overturning evils and outmoded customs of the past, reevaluating things from the ground up, and starting at the source to find solutions for change. Such thoroughgoing transformation will, quite naturally, meet with resistance, but it is the only way to open a new path forward. The Buddhism of Nichiren Daishonin is a teaching of unwavering commitment to the positive transformation of reality - a teaching that makes it possible for us to change this troubled saha world into a realm of peace and happiness.

From Learning from the Writings of Nichiren Daishonin: The Teachings for Victory, vol. 7, published in Japanese in August 2014.

Section 6: Forever Connected by Our Great Vow for Kosen-rufu

The Hall of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu was opened in November 2013. President Ikeda touched on this landmark event in his messages to the November 8 gongyo meeting commemorating its completion and the November 18 Soka Gakkai Headquarters leaders meeting celebrating the organization's founding.

Note on terminology: Bodhisattvas of the Earth are an innumerable host of bodhisattvas who emerge from beneath the earth and to whom Shakyamuni Buddha entrusts the propagation of the Mystic Law, or the essence of the Lotus Sutra, in the Latter Day of the Law.

Note on terminology: The Atsuhara Persecution was a series of threats and acts of violence against followers of Nichiren Daishonin in Atsuhara Village in Fuji District, Suruga Province, present-day central Shizuoka Prefecture, starting in around 1275 and continuing until around 1283. In 1279, 20 farmer disciples were arrested on false charges. They were interrogated by Hei no Saemon-no-jo, the deputy chief of the Office of Military and Police Affairs, who demanded that they renounce their faith. However, not one of them yielded. Hei no Saemon-no-jo eventually had three of them executed.

Note on terminology: The three powerful enemies are three types of arrogant people who persecute those who propagate the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni Buddha's death, described in the concluding verse section of the "Encouraging Devotion" 13th chapter of the Lotus Sutra. The Great Teacher Miao-lo of China summarizes them as arrogant lay people, arrogant priests, and arrogant false sages.

Note on terminology: The Soka Gakkai Joju Gohonzon bears the inscription "For the Fulfillment of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu through the Compassionate Propagation of the Great Law." It also bears the inscription "To Be Permanently Enshrined in the Soka Gakkai," in Japanese Soka Gakkai Joju. It is now enshrined in the Hall of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu in Shinanomachi, Tokyo. It is also referred to as the Soka Gakkai Kosen-rufu Gohonzon.

Visitors to this magnificent edifice, the Hall of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu, are greeted by eight pillars that line both its southern and northern sides.

In The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, Nichiren Daishonin states: "In the 'Encouragements of the Bodhisattva Universal Worthy' chapter of the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni Buddha revealed the foremost point he wished to convey to us. The Buddha preached the Lotus Sutra over a period of eight years, and eight characters sum up the message that he has left behind for living beings in this later age, the Latter Day of the Law. This eight-character passage reads: 'You should rise and greet them from afar, showing them the same respect you would a Buddha'" (cf. LSOC28, 365) (OTT, 192).

He further clarifies the message of these eight characters as "one should without fail show the practitioners of the Lotus Sutra the kind of respect one would show to a Buddha" (OTT, 193).

The eight pillars on the north and south sides of this building, therefore, symbolize this eight-character passage that expresses the heart of the Lotus Sutra, which is also the Soka Gakkai spirit of treasuring each member as if they were a Buddha. I share this with you today for the sake of future generations.

During his life-threatening exile on Sado Island, the Daishonin declared: "I will make a great vow" (WND-1, 280). He pledged to be the pillar, the eyes, the great ship that would save all people from suffering, praying single-mindedly for the realization of kosen-rufu. The "great vow" he made is none other than the great vow for the propagation of the Lotus Sutra - that is, the great vow for kosen-rufu.

Seven centuries after the Daishonin first proclaimed his teaching, the Soka Gakkai appeared in modern times - at the very height of this age of conflict that is the Latter Day of the Law - taking upon itself the mission to accomplish the great vow for kosen-rufu in exact accord with Nichiren Daishonin's spirit. It is truly the organization carrying out the Buddha's intent.

The heart of the great vow for kosen-rufu and the life state of Buddhahood are one and the same. Therefore, when we dedicate our lives to this vow, we can bring forth the supreme nobility, strength, and greatness of our lives. When we remain true to this vow, the limitless courage, wisdom, and compassion of the Buddha flow forth from within us. When we wholeheartedly strive to realize this vow, the "poison" of even the most difficult challenge can be transformed into "medicine," and karma transformed into mission.

This is the spirit of our infinitely worthy members. This is the hallmark of our invincible humanistic network of Soka.

The Joju Gohonzon enshrined in the altar here is the "banner of propagation of the Lotus Sutra" (WND-1, 831) upheld by the Soka Gakkai, which is dedicated to this great vow. It bears the inscription "For the Fulfillment of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu through the Compassionate Propagation of the Great Law."

As President Toda's true disciple, I protected this Gohonzon in the Mentor-Disciple Hall of the former Soka Gakkai Headquarters building, and went out into the world to make the "fulfillment of the great vow for kosen-rufu through the compassionate propagation of the great Law" a reality.

President Makiguchi, who resisted wartime militarism and died in prison for his beliefs, had vowed to realize the Daishonin's ideal of "establishing the correct teaching for the peace of the land." Making his vow my own, I began and developed a diverse global network of people committed to the values of peace, culture, and education.

I chanted constantly before this Gohonzon, praying for the happiness, health, and longevity of all our members and for them to successfully carry out their human revolution and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. And, looking toward the distant future of our movement, I continued my efforts to create a solid and unending flow of capable successors and took decisive leadership to thoroughly ensure the eternal perpetuation of the Law.

And now this time has come, and we are able to see the long-awaited completion of this towering citadel of mentor and disciple.

This is truly a golden place of assembly like that described in the Lotus Sutra, as Bodhisattvas of the Earth from around the world joyously gather to chant before the Soka Gakkai Kosen-rufu Gohonzon enshrined here - causing the life state of Buddhahood that is one with the great vow from time without beginning to shine forth brightly like the morning sun - and make a fresh departure with brand-new energy and commitment.

Stones collected from all 47 prefectures of Japan and from 192 countries and territories around the world have been placed in the base of the altar.

Our prayers encompass our local communities and the entire world.

This hall is a place where world citizens of the Mystic Law gather together in rich diversity to "chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but one in mind, transcending all differences among themselves to become as inseparable as fish and the water in which they swim" (WND-1, 217), just as the Daishonin describes in "The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life." It is a jeweled tower of unparalleled human harmony where members warmly support and encourage one another as they pledge anew to keep exerting themselves bravely and vigorously for the happiness and security of the people, the flourishing of society, the realization of world peace, and the transformation of the destiny of all humankind.

I, therefore, propose that, from this day forward, this hall be called the Hall of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu, and that we joyfully initiate a fresh dynamic advance, spreading hope and justice, toward a new era of worldwide kosen-rufu. What do you say?

The Daishonin writes: "This is my vow, and I will never forsake it!" (WND-1, 281). Taking to heart the spirit embodied in this new hall, let us promise one another, as fellow members of the Soka family, to always keep our vow for kosen-rufu burning brightly in our hearts. Let us be determined to overcome all obstacles and lead lives of indestructible victory and complete fulfillment as we make our way together in harmonious unity and high spirits!

From a message sent to a gongyo meeting commemorating the completion of the Hall of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu, Tokyo, November 8, 2013.

The essential teaching, the latter 14 chapters of the Lotus Sutra, reveals that the life of the Buddha is eternal and imperishable from time without beginning (cf. LSOC16, 267-68). The sutra's "Life Span" chapter, which is the heart of the essential teaching, concludes with these lines:

At all times I think to myself: How can I cause living beings to gain entry into the unsurpassed way and quickly acquire the body of a Buddha? (LSOC16, 273)

In other words, the Buddha is constantly thinking about how to guide all living beings to the supreme path and enable them to quickly attain enlightenment.

The life state of Buddhahood is characterized by one's mind and one's life being filled with a fervent wish for people's happiness and an unwavering commitment to keep striving in this suffering-filled saha world to help everyone attain Buddhahood. Because the Buddha is eternally dedicated to this vow, the life of the Buddha is eternal. Nichiren Daishonin refers to this constant thought that occupies the Buddha's mind as "the compassionate vow of the Buddha" (WND-1, 62), without which the eternal Buddha cannot exist.

In the midst of the Atsuhara Persecution, the Daishonin wrote to his youthful follower Nanjo Tokimitsu: "My wish is that all my disciples make a great vow." He further assured Tokimitsu that if he strove to realize the vow for kosen-rufu until the last moment of his life, he would be able to attain the vast and expansive life state of Buddhahood, eternal and indestructible - his life merging with the life of the universe like "a drop of dew rejoining the ocean, or a speck of dust returning to the earth" (WND-1, 1003).

We of the Soka Gakkai, connected by the bonds of mentor and disciple, are a gathering of Bodhisattvas of the Earth. Like Presidents Makiguchi and Toda before us, we have made a great vow to realize kosen-rufu through the compassionate propagation of the Mystic Law, in complete accord with the Daishonin's wish. We have exerted ourselves tirelessly to fulfill this vow, while battling the onslaughts of the three powerful enemies in this corrupt and degenerate age of the Latter Day of the Law.

Our steadfast members have resolutely triumphed over slander and abuse, overcome the storms of their personal karma, and transformed the four sufferings of birth, aging, sickness, and death into the boundless joy of a life imbued with the four noble virtues of eternity, happiness, true self, and purity.

Based on the Buddhist principle of the oneness of life and death, I am firmly convinced that all the members of our Soka family who have passed away in the course of our struggle for kosen-rufu are also present at today's assembly in the Hall of the Great Vow for Kosen-rufu.

We have the Gohonzon, the path of mentor and disciple, and our fellow members - all of which are dedicated to the realization of the great vow for kosen-rufu. And we are forever connected as mentor and disciple by this great vow.

Solidly united in the spirit of "many in body, one in mind," sharing both joys and sufferings together, let us continue on this fulfilling and victorious journey of life in high spirits, harmony, and good cheer.

Donning "the armor of perseverance" (LSOC13, 233), speaking out with courage, and wisely uniting the hearts of people all around the world, let us build on this Earth a realm of peace and happiness embodying the Daishonin's ideal of "establishing the correct teaching for the peace of the land."

From a message sent to a gongyo meeting commemorating Soka Gakkai Foundation Day, Tokyo, November 18, 2013.

Section 7: Make Your Life a Beacon

On April 2, 2000, a convocation in tribute to the spiritual legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Mahatma Gandhi was held at Morehouse College, a historically black school in Atlanta, which was King's alma mater. In his message to the event, referencing King's "I Have a Dream" speech, President Ikeda speaks of his vision of entrusting the principle of respect for the dignity of life to future generations.

The Soka Gakkai's first and second presidents, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi and Josei Toda, were imprisoned for resisting Japan's fascist government during World War II. Supporting this oppression were corrupt priests who betrayed the spirit of Buddhism. Our first president died in prison as a result of such persecution. Our second president emerged from his two-year struggle as a prisoner and initiated a movement to bring spiritual awareness to the people of postwar Japan.

Today, April 2, marks the anniversary of the passing of my mentor, our second president. Like Dr. King, my mentor had a dream. His dream, he stated, was to "rid the world of misery."

Throughout his life, my mentor acted as the greatest ally of the sick and the poor. Amid the bitter divisions of the Cold War, he advocated the ideal of global citizenship and the abolition of nuclear weapons. For 42 years since my mentor's passing, I have dedicated my life to bringing his dream closer to reality.

The ultimate and most wonderful of human relationships is that shared by successors to a lofty spiritual legacy. Even animals have relationships similar to those we have between parent and child, siblings, spouses, partners, and friends. However, the relationship of mentor and disciple, of spiritual successors, exists only among human beings.

With this in mind, I ask that you join me in transmitting a message to our successors, our children: "Have a dream! If you have a dream, you will someday approach that dream!"

Let us tell our children: "Overcome your obstacles and advance! You have the energy and mission to make the world a better place. When you awaken to this fact, your talents will fully blossom. You will be surprised at how strong you have become."

Let us tell our children: "Resist and oppose evil. Say 'No' to drugs, to violence, and to destructive temptations. Only when you respect and cherish yourselves will you gain the respect of others. Only when you care for yourselves can you care for others."

Children are envoys from the future. To speak with children is to speak with the future. Their problems will be different from those of our generation - they may face problems we can't even begin to imagine. Therefore, let us support them and lend them a helping hand, so that they may stand up and move forward with courage.

Let us tell our children: "To witness evil and yet stand silently by is to be an ally to evil. Failure to do good yields the same result as doing bad. Each time you overlook evil, you allow another malicious weed to take root. To exclude others is violence. To ignore, disregard, or be apathetic toward injustice is also violence."

And let us tell our children: "Don't let your spirit rest! Give expression to the empathy and humanity you possess. Act! Break loose from the restraints of laziness and cowardice, and begin something new. Only in action is there growth of the spirit. Only in growth of the spirit does one find happiness. Happiness can never be bought."

Let us tell our children: "You must never forget! Never forget those who came before you, those who held high the torch of hope during the long, dark night and fell on the way. Never forget that previous generations have struggled on behalf of those who had suffered before them and also for the sake of you, their children, grandchildren, and all those who will follow in the future."

Let us tell our children: "What would make your predecessors happiest is for you to carry on their struggle, to fight for the happiness of future generations as they have, and to care and work for those who are suffering. When you do this, you will come to understand why those before you were able to hold their heads high and live with pride despite being surrounded by cruelty and lies. You will come to understand why they never gave up on their dreams, no matter how often they were betrayed. You will begin to know why they stood tall and kept marching ahead, despite rocks being thrown and guns being aimed at them. It was all to provide you with a wonderful future!"

And lastly, let us tell our children: "Love the people! Live splendid lives! Make your life a beacon that will illuminate the darkness ahead. Be a guidepost to point the way for future generations. Work together to create the world of the 21st century, a world where there is no murder, a society where no one is neglected or left behind. Build a monument of achievement that glows with the light of human fellowship!"

From a message sent to Millennium Sunday, A Gathering of Spiritual Awareness, held at the Martin Luther King, Jr. International Chapel, Morehouse College, USA, April 2, 2000.
