======================================================================
Chapter 6 - The Mystic Nature of Our Lives—Become the Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You
======================================================================

The Mystic Nature of Our Lives—

“Become the Master of Your Mind

Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You”

What then does myo signify? It is simply the mysterious nature of our life from

moment to moment, which the mind cannot comprehend or words express.

When we look into our own mind at any moment, we perceive neither color

nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for

many differing thoughts continually occur. The mind cannot be considered

either to exist or not to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcends

both the words and concepts of existence and nonexistence. It is neither exis-

tence nor nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both. It is the mystic entity

of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality. Myo is the name given to the

mystic nature of life, and ho, to its manifestations [the manifestations of the

mind of myo]. Renge, which means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the

wonder of this Law. If we understand that our life at this moment is myo, then

we will also understand that our life at other moments is the Mystic Law. This

realization is the mystic kyo, or sutra. The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the

direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life, which

manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the

Mystic Law. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

46

“ t is the heart that is important” (“The mirror reflecting the essential nature of phenom-Strategy of the Lotus Sutra,” WND-1, 1000), ena and the true aspect of reality” (see WND-1, 4). I

writes Nichiren Daishonin. Our hearts, our In other words, by manifesting the mystic truth

minds, are truly wondrous and unfathomable. We that resides within us, we can tap our infinite

can expand and deepen the inner realm of our inner potential. Buddhahood is the state of life

spirit infinitely and boundlessly. that is one with Myoho-renge-kyo, the originally

Like the elation of soaring freely through the inherent mystic truth. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is

vast blue heavens, the heart can feel immense and also the name of this ultimate state of life. untrammeled joy. Like the clear, bright sunshine The passage I will discuss this time explains

illuminating all things, the heart can embrace the relation between Myoho-renge-kyo and the

with warmth and compassion those who are suf- mind of living beings in terms of the elements of

fering. And like a lion of justice, the heart can also myo, ho, renge and kyo. This explanation may be at times tremble with righteous anger and defeat seen as a description of how our lives become

evil. Indeed, our hearts or minds are constantly one with Myoho-renge-kyo and manifest the

changing, like scenes in a drama or like an unfold- state of Buddhahood. Let us consider the pro-

ing panorama. And nothing is more wondrous found meaning of this passage. than the heart’s ability to manifest the world of

Buddhahood. Even people weighed down by

delusion and suffering can bring forth in the The Mind Is the Mystic Entity of the depths of their lives the state of Buddhahood that Middle Way That Is the Ultimate Reality is one with the universe. This momentous drama

of transformation is the greatest of all wonders. Nichiren Daishonin says that myo of Myoho-

Buddhism finds supreme nobility and the renge-kyo signifies the marvelous nature of our

potential for great change in all human beings. lives from moment to moment. And he uses the

In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” concepts of existence and nonexistence to describe

Nichiren, therefore, concludes that when we this wondrous and unfathomable nature. thoroughly polish our lives through chanting Our minds are in a state of constant flux,

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, it is possible for us to moving with the ebb and flow of countless

tap the life-state of Buddhahood no matter thoughts and emotions. Nichiren notes: “When

how steeped in delusion we may be, and to we look into our own mind at any moment, we

transform even the most impure and evil land perceive neither color nor form to verify that it

into a pure land. exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for

Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the “mystic many differing thoughts continually occur. The

truth that is originally inherent in all living mind cannot be considered either to exist or not

beings” (WND-1, 3). Accordingly, through the to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that tran-

practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we scends both the words and concepts of existence

can reveal our inner Buddhahood—polishing “the and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor

tarnished mirror of a mind now clouded by the nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both”

illusions of the innate darkness of life” into “a clear (WND-1, 4).

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Nichiren describes this unfathomable Renge Refers to the Principle of the nature of the mind as the “mystic entity of the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect Middle Way that is the ultimate reality” (WND-

1, 4). The Middle Way does not simply mean Nichiren Daishonin next states that ho, meaning the middle course between two extremes; it Law or phenomena, is the name given to the

refers to a more lofty perspective that is swayed manifestations of the mystic nature of our lives or

by neither extreme but also embraces them minds—a term that can also be expressed as the

both. Shakyamuni set forth a sound philosophy wondrous mind or the “mind of myo.” The mind and practice transcending the two then-pre- of myo is itself the Mystic Law. Abstract words vailing extremes of hedonism and asceticism, and theories alone—be they the concepts of

and he called this the Middle Way. In “On nonsubstantiality or the unification of the three

Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nich- truths—cannot be called the Mystic Law. For only

iren says that the ultimate truth, which when the Mystic Law is expressed as the highest

transcends the two extremes of existence and human wisdom based on the Middle Way can it

nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the spread as a guide and compass, and as a teaching

Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of or Law (ho) for people to follow. truth, he calls it the “ultimate reality.” In addition, Nichiren says: “Renge, which

Transcending existence and nonexistence can means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the won-

be taken to mean transcending impermanent der of this Law” (WND-1, 4). The Mystic Law is

phenomena that alternate ceaselessly between not visible to the human eye. Therefore, the Bud-

existence and nonexistence. Further, exhibiting dha uses a concrete symbol in order to help

the qualities of both existence and nonexistence people understand the Law’s wondrous and mys-

while transcending both does not refer to a tran- tic nature. This is renge, meaning “lotus flower.” scendent or absolute being divorced from Why does he employ the lotus flower? Usually

impermanent phenomena, but indicates the truly plants flower first and then bear fruit—a relation-

eternal that encompasses and resides within ship that is used to illustrate linear or sequential

impermanent phenomena. causality, with the flowers representing the cause

Although Nichiren explains the mysterious and the fruit the effect. In Buddhism, this is

nature of life or mind in terms of the concepts referred to as the nonsimultaneity of cause and

of existence and nonexistence in this writing, effect. By contrast, the lotus flower puts forth its

what he says here is comparable to Nagarjuna’s petals and its receptacle (which contains its fruit)

concept of nonsubstantiality,1 and to T’ien- simultaneously—in other words, its fruit is pro-

t’ai’s concepts of the unification of the three duced at the same time its petals open. The lotus

truths2 and the threefold contemplation in a thus symbolizes the principle of the simultaneity

single mind.3 Essentially, “the mystic entity of of cause and effect. the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality” of The provisional teachings other than the Lotus

which Nichiren speaks refers to our lives or Sutra do not teach that Buddhahood is inherent

minds that are one with the ultimate truth—a within the lives of ordinary people, which is

concept expressed variously as nonsubstantial- regarded as the cause for attaining enlightenment.

ity, the unification of the three truths, or Rather, they teach that one can only gain the state

threefold contemplation in a single mind. of Buddhahood after undergoing countless eons of

Buddhist practice. Here, cause and effect are non- bone and marrow of our beings, with flowers of

simultaneous. The teachings of the Lotus Sutra, benefit blossoming in our characters and in our

however, clarify that all people are originally lives. This is the mystic kyo in terms of our indi-endowed with the state of Buddhahood and can vidual lives. reveal it instantaneously. In other words, the Also, we can regard this mystic kyo as the deluded mind of an ordinary person is instantly spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to

transformed into the mind of myo (the supreme others. When “the mind at this moment” is

enlightenment) of a Buddha. The lotus flower understood to mean the Buddha’s mind and “the

symbolizes this simultaneity of cause and effect. mind at other moments” is taken to mean the

minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the Buddha’s teachings that expound aspects of his

Maintaining the Mind of Myo enlightenment regarding the mystic nature of

Is the Mystic Kyo life, or the mind of myo. And the king of sutras

that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is

Nichiren Daishonin explains that kyo, meaning the Lotus Sutra, the essence of which is Myoho-

“sutra,” of Myoho-renge-kyo also refers to realiz- renge-kyo. In that sense, the development of

ing the mystic nature of life. He says: “If we kosen-rufu, with people propagating the Mystic

understand that our life at this moment is myo, Law and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

then we will also understand that our life at other unstintingly for their own happiness and that of

moments is the Mystic Law. This realization is the others and teaching others to do the same, could

mystic kyo, or sutra” (WND-1, 4). be said to correspond to the mystic kyo.

Kyo is written with a Chinese character indi- As seen in the aforementioned discussion,

cating the vertical thread, or warp, in a loom or Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent in our own

fabric, and it is also used to refer to the passage of lives. The ongoing moment-to-moment transfor-

time. In this respect, Nichiren speaks of our lives mation in our hearts and minds that we achieve

or minds at this moment and our lives or minds through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo not

at other moments. Our lives or minds are con- only leads to a fundamental inner change but to a

stantly changing, but when we defeat our inner change in the entire way we live our lives, putting

darkness, or ignorance, through strong faith us on track to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

expressed through our chanting Nam-myoho- And it further creates a groundswell for the great

renge-kyo, the innate mystic truth appears within transformation of all humankind that is kosen-

us, and the life of Myoho-renge—literally, lotus of rufu. The dynamic force for change on all levels is

the Mystic Law—blooms within our hearts. Myoho-renge-kyo.

Day by day, through consistently chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can accumulate the

causes and effects for attaining Buddhahood that Becoming the Masters of Our Minds make it possible to transform a mind clouded by

the innate darkness of life into a mind reflecting Since Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent within

the essential nature of phenomena and the true our lives, there is another topic I must touch on.

aspect of reality (see WND-1, 4). The virtues of Namely, the relation between the mind of delu-

these causes and effects over time become the sion clouded by innate darkness and the mind

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

of myo illuminated by the essential nature of phe- living true to that vow. This is the way of life of nomena and the true aspect of reality. “taking refuge in the Law” that Shakyamuni

If we follow the deluded minds of ordinary emphasized in his final injunction to his disciples people—minds that tend to be weak and easily before he died.5 swayed—our inner potential can rapidly wither The priests of the various Buddhist schools or, even worse, we may succumb to negative and during Nichiren’s lifetime had forgotten this destructive impulses. This is a problem stemming spirit of Shakyamuni. Following their own arbi-from the subtlety of the mind. Because our minds trary minds or thinking, they lost sight of the are the key to attaining Buddhahood in this Buddha’s teachings, denigrated the Lotus Sutra lifetime, we must overcome our own inner weak- and succumbed to arrogance. By contrast, Nichi-nesses. This is what our Buddhist practice is all ren taught that the true master of the mind is about. The deluded minds of ordinary people are Myoho-renge-kyo—the heart of the Lotus Sutra constantly wavering. We must not make such and the fundamental Law of all Buddhas—and wavering minds our basis or guide. set forth the concrete practice of chanting Nam-

Nichiren Daishonin emphasizes this by citing myoho-renge-kyo for mastering one’s mind. Also, the well-known passage “Become the master of he frequently stressed to his followers the impor-your mind rather than let your mind master you” tant spirit of faith to seek this true master of the (“Letter to the Brothers,” WND-1, 502). This pas- mind—the Mystic Law. sage is from the Six Paramitas Sutra, which states For example, when, on account of his faith, the to the effect: “Our minds may suddenly run out of elder of the Ikegami brothers6 was disowned by control. Therefore, we must tame them like a wild their father, Nichiren encouraged the two brothers, elephant, not allowing our minds to become our saying that this was precisely the time for them, masters, but rather seeking to master our minds.”4 based on faith, to unite and overcome the situa-The Nirvana Sutra contains a similar passage, tion. He offers them this guidance: “A passage in “May I be the master of my mind and not let my the Six Paramitas Sutra says to become the master mind become my master!” (“Letter to Renjo,” of your mind rather than let your mind master WND-2, 5). Nichiren cites this admonition many you. Whatever trouble occurs, regard it as no more times, making it a guideline for his followers. than a dream, and think only of the Lotus Sutra”

Becoming the master of one’s mind means (“Letter to the Brothers,” WND-1, 502). having a sound compass in life and the bright No matter what difficult circumstances we beacon of faith. We must not be mastered by ordi- may face, we can break through them without nary people’s inconstant, weak and ever-changing fail as long as our faith does not waver. Faith minds of delusion. To master our minds, we must is a battle against our own inner weaknesses. guide them in the right direction. In that sense, Nichiren teaches that to win in this battle, we the true master of the mind is the Law and the must base our lives wholeheartedly on the teachings of the Buddha. Shakyamuni vowed to essence of the Lotus Sutra—the Mystic Law of make the Law to which he had become enlight- Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—without being swayed ened the master of his mind, and he took pride in by weak-heartedness.

The Path of Mentor and Disciple my mentor in my heart. This is the spirit of the

Based on the Law oneness of mentor and disciple. Those who

hold fast to their spiritual mentor as their com-

From the story of the Ikegami brothers’ tri- pass and exert themselves as that mentor

umph, we also learn the faith of the oneness teaches are people who live based on the Law. of mentor and disciple. Because the brothers Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching founded on

conducted themselves exactly as Nichiren Dai- the oneness of mentor and disciple. And the

shonin instructed, they could overcome their Lotus Sutra is likewise a scripture of the oneness

ordeal; discern the scheming of Ryokan, chief of mentor and disciple. priest of Gokuraku-ji, behind their father’s At the end of this writing, to convey the

actions; and in the end win the dramatic victory importance of the mentor-disciple relationship

of their father taking faith. in walking the great path of attaining Buddha-

To allow ourselves to be mastered by our hood in this lifetime, Nichiren cites a passage

minds is to lead a self-centered existence. Ulti- from the “Supernatural Powers” chapter of the

mately, we will be pulled this way and that by our Lotus Sutra.7 Next time, I will discuss the pro-constantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism found meaning of this passage, but suffice it to

and sink into the depths of darkness or igno- say here that the path to attaining Buddhahood

rance. Conversely, to become the master of our is found in the practice of Bodhisattvas of

minds is to live based on the Law. the Earth who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

A teacher or mentor in Buddhism is one who the Law inherent in their lives, for both their

leads and connects people to the Law—teaching own happiness and that of others, and who teach

them that the Law on which they should depend others to do the same. already exists within their own lives. The disciples Above all, the great path to attaining Buddha-

in turn seek the mentor, who embodies and is one hood in this lifetime lies in practicing faith with

with the Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple,

they exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. making our minds one with the lofty mind of

In this way, they lead lives in which they become the Buddha and not being swayed by our inner

masters of their minds. darkness or the three poisons—greed, anger and

In other words, the existence of a mentor— foolishness. Faith based on the mentor-disciple

one who embodies and lives in complete accord spirit is the key to opening the treasure within

with the Law, and who teaches people about the our lives that is as vast as the universe. Moreover,

vast inner potential they possess—is indispen- courageously exerting ourselves in chanting

sable for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and taking action for

I had a mentor who practiced as the Buddha kosen-rufu is the direct path to attaining Buddha-

taught—our second Soka Gakkai president, hood in this lifetime. Josei Toda, who dedicated his life to widely

propagating Nichiren Buddhism in the modern

age—and that has made me who I am today.

President Toda is always with me as my spiritual

mentor. Even now, day after day, and moment

by moment, I am carrying on a dialogue with

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

1. Nagarjuna: A Mahayana scholar of southern India, thought to have constitutes the doctrinal core of T’ien-t’ai’s teaching, the threefold

lived between the years 150 and 250, who is especially known for his contemplation in a single mind constitutes the core of the T’ien-t’ai

systematization of the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. Nonsubstantial- practice. This contemplation involves perceiving the three truths as

ity is the concept that things and phenomena have no fixed or simultaneously and perfectly integrated and interfused in each phe-

independent nature or existence of their own. Nagarjuna integrated nomenon. It is equal to observing a single moment of life and seeing

the practical doctrine of the Middle Way, transcending both asceti- the three thousand realms within it. At the same time, one perceives

cism and hedonism, and the concept of dependent origination into that all phenomena consist of the three thousand realms.

the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. In other words, by viewing all things 4. The Six Paramitas Sutra states: “If you are always the master of your

not as entities with an eternally fixed nature but as always assuming mind rather than letting your mind master you, your mind will not

a temporary and changing aspect through their relation to other run amok. It is just like taming an elephant.”

things (i.e., dependent origination), one can act based on a true per- 5. The Buddha said: “[L]ive as islands unto yourselves, being your own

ception of reality, without either attachment or fixed prejudices (i.e., refuge, with no one else as your refuge, with the Dhamma [i.e., Dhar-

the Middle Way). ma, or Law] as an island, with the Dhamma as your refuge, with no

2. Unification of the three truths: Based on the section in Nagarjuna’s other refuge.” Mahaparinibbana Sutta: The Great Passing—The Bud-

Treatise on the Middle Way that integrates the concepts of nonsubstan- dha’s Last Days, in The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of

tiality, dependent origination and the Middle Way, the Great Teacher the Digha Nikaya, translated by Maurice Walshe (Boston: Wisdom

T’ien-t’ai established the doctrine of the three truths: the truth of Publications, 1995), p. 245.

nonsubstantiality, the truth of temporary existence and the truth of 6. Ikegami brothers: Leading disciples of Nichiren Daishonin. The elder

the Middle Way. Further, he clarified that these truths, rather than brother, Munenaka, was twice disowned by the father, a follower of

being separate and independent of one another, are three ways of Ryokan. At the same time, the father tempted Munenaga, the younger

viewing any particular thing or entity, and that the three moreover brother, to abandon his faith and take his brother’s place as the next

constitute an integral whole, each possessing all three within itself. head of the family. Despite these adversities, the brothers persevered in

This is called the unification of the three truths. faith. The father rescinded Munenaka’s disinheritance and in the end

3. Threefold contemplation in a single mind: A method of meditation took faith in Nichiren’s teachings.

formulated by T’ien-t’ai to enable people to perceive the unification of 7. The passage states: “After I [Shakyamuni] have passed into extinction,/

the three truths of nonsubstantiality, temporary existence and the [one] should accept and uphold this sutra./ Such a person assuredly and

Middle Way. While the concept of the unification of the three truths without doubt/ will attain the Buddha way” (WND-1, 4; LSOC, 318).

Key Points

The Meaning of Myo—the Middle Way The Meaning of Kyo—the Practice

Nichiren describes this unfathomable nature of the for Oneself and Others

mind as the “mystic entity of the Middle Way that is We can regard this mystic kyo as the spread of the the ultimate reality” (WND-1, 4). The Middle Way Mystic Law from ourselves to others. When “the

does not simply mean the middle course between mind at this moment” is understood to mean the

two extremes; it refers to a more lofty perspective Buddha’s mind and “the mind at other moments”

that is swayed by neither extreme but also is taken to mean the minds of all living beings,

embraces them both. Shakyamuni set forth a then kyo refers to the Buddha’s teachings that sound philosophy and practice transcending the expound aspects of his enlightenment regarding

two then-prevailing extremes of hedonism and the mystic nature of life, or the mind of myo. asceticism, and he called this the Middle Way. In And the king of sutras that directly elucidates

“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the Nichiren says that the ultimate truth, which

essence of which is Myoho-renge-kyo. In that

transcends the two extremes of existence and

sense, the development of kosen-rufu, with peo-

nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the

ple propagating the Mystic Law and chanting

Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for their

truth, he calls it the “ultimate reality.” Transcending

own happiness and that of others and teaching

existence and nonexistence can be taken to mean

others to do the same, could be said to corre-

transcending impermanent phenomena that

spond to the mystic kyo. (p. 49)

alternate ceaselessly between existence and nonex-

istence. Further, exhibiting the qualities of both

existence and nonexistence while transcending Mastering One’s Mind— both does not refer to a transcendent or absolute the Path of Mentor and Disciple being divorced from impermanent phenomena, To allow ourselves to be mastered by our minds

but indicates the truly eternal that encompasses and is to lead a self-centered existence. Ultimately,

resides within impermanent phenomena. (p. 48) we will be pulled this way and that by our con-

stantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism and

The Meaning of Renge— sink into the depths of darkness or ignorance.

the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect Conversely, to become the master of our minds

The Mystic Law is not visible to the human eye. is to live based on the Law. A teacher or mentor

Therefore, the Buddha uses a concrete symbol in in Buddhism is one who leads and connects

order to help people understand the Law’s won- people to the Law—teaching them that the Law

drous and mystic nature. This is on which they should depend already exists renge , meaning

“lotus flower.” Why does he employ the lotus within their own lives. The disciples in turn seek

flower? Usually plants flower first and then bear the mentor, who embodies and is one with the

fruit—a relationship that is used to illustrate Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, they linear or sequential causality, with the flowers exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. In representing the cause and the fruit the effect. In this way, they lead lives in which they become

Buddhism, this is referred to as the nonsimultane- masters of their minds. In other words, the

ity of cause and effect. By contrast, the lotus flower existence of a mentor—one who embodies and

puts forth its petals and its receptacle (which con- lives in complete accord with the Law, and who

tains its fruit) simultaneously—in other words, its teaches people about the vast inner potential

fruit is produced at the same time its petals open. they possess—is indispensable for attaining

The lotus thus symbolizes the principle of the Buddhahood in this lifetime. (p. 51) simultaneity of cause and effect. (p. 48)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime