On Attaining in This Lifetime Daisaku Ikeda Published by World Tribune Press 606 Wilshire Blvd. Santa Monica, CA  90401 ©2011 by the Soka Gakkai . All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Design by Lightbourne, Inc. ISBN 978-1-935523-21-5 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Contents iv  Editor’s Note  1  “Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—The  Fundamental Purpose of Life and a Source of  Hope for Humankind” (1)  11  “The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge. kyo—Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through  Correct Buddhist Practice” (2)  20  “‘If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, You Are  Not Embracing the Mystic Law’” (3)  28  “Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude—Refusing  To Live an ‘Endless, Painful Austerity’” (4)  37  “Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a ‘Brave and  Vigorous’ Spirit—Polishing Our Lives Through Daily  Challenge” (5)  46  “The Mystic Nature of Our Lives—‘Become the  Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind  Master You’” (6)  54  “Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—  Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the  Oneness of Mentor and Disciple” (7)  64  Index  Editor’s Note This series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda was published in SGI-USA’s Living Buddhism from the September –October 2006 issue through the March –April 2007 issue. Please also see The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, pp. 3–5, for “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.” • GZ, page number(s)—refers to the Gosho zenshu, the Japanese-language compilation of letters, treatises, essays and oral teachings of Nichiren Daishonin. • LSOC, page number(s)—refers to The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, translated by Burton Watson (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2009). • OTT, page number(s)—refers to The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, translated by Burton Watson (Soka Gakkai: Tokyo, 2004). • WND, page number(s)—refers to The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1 (WND-1) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 1999) and vol. 2 (WND-2) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2006). On Attaining in This Lifetime SGI President Ikeda’s Lecture Series This is a series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on the writing “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.” He writes, “Nichiren Daishonin’s profound teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime can powerfully transform the age and open a bright future for our modern world in the twenty-first century.”   [1] Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime— The Fundamental Purpose of Life and a Source of Hope for Humankind  If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is orig.inally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3) Just what constitutes a deeply meaningful life? What is true happiness? Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching of hope that enables us to forge a state of unsurpassed and indestructible happi.ness and to lead a life of supreme value, while also helping others do the same. All people have the potential to attain Buddhahood; moreover, they can gain that lofty state just as they are and in fact are assured of being able to do so in this lifetime. Nichiren Buddhism clearly elucidates this wonderful path to enlightenment. Nichiren Daishonin’s profound teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime was a revolutionary concept that turned prevailing Buddhist thought on its head. Indeed, it con.tinues to shine today as a principle that can powerfully transform the age and open a bright future for our modern world in the twenty-first century. Therefore, I look forward to studying Nichiren’s writing “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime” together with you, as we embark in high spirits on a new journey of growth and development toward the Soka Gakkai’s eightieth anniversary (in 2010).  The Profound Meaning of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime” is an important writing that clarifies the basic theory and practice of Nichiren Buddhism. SGI members throughout the globe have deepened their understanding of the essence of Nichiren Daishonin’s teachings by earnestly studying this writing as a guideline for practice and study. Although the original is no longer extant and the precise date and name of the recipient are unknown, this letter is traditionally thought to have been written around 1255 and addressed to Toki Jonin.1 The assertion that it was composed in 1255, shortly after Nichiren publicly declared his teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in 1253, is credible in view of the letter’s content, explaining as it does the significance of chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo in terms of both theory and practice. The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo is the foundation of Nichiren’s lifetime of teachings. Nichiren Buddhism, unlike the estab.lished Buddhist schools of his day, was not dedicated to the worship of a specific god or Bud.dha. Nichiren established the means for all people to achieve enlightenment, the ideal of the Lotus Sutra, by formulating the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which enables us to acti.vate our inherent Buddha nature and manifest it as the life-state of Buddhahood. In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo has two aspects: the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and chanting in terms of practice. Chanting in terms of faith refers to the spiritual aspect of our prac.tice. This essentially consists of the struggle we wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or darkness—a battle against the negative and destructive forces within us. It means that through the power of faith—in other words, through strengthening our conviction that we possess the Buddha nature—we can break through the darkness obscuring this awareness, thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood. Chanting in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves and also teaching it to others. It means making efforts in word and deed for our own and others’ happiness in the course of our spiritual struggle against inner negativity and illusion. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we are both chanting the name of, and calling forth, the Buddha nature in our own lives and the lives of others. Through applying our practice of faith to win over doubt and delusion, the power of our inherent Buddha nature is called forth by the sound of our chanting and spontaneously mani.fests in our lives.2 The key point that sets Nichiren Buddhism apart from the other Buddhist schools of his day was the establishment of this concrete means for attaining Buddhahood. And from the time he first declared Nam-myoho-renge-kyo until the moment of his death, Nichiren ardently strove to teach this supreme path of enlightenment to peo.ple throughout the land. In the opening passage of “On Attaining Bud.dhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren clearly and fully articulates the basic philosophy of enlight.enment that lies at the heart of his teaching, which exists for the happiness of all humanity: “If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho.renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life” (WND-1, 3). We’ll discuss the profound meaning of this passage in detail next time. But briefly, it says that by manifesting within us the mystic truth inher.ent in all living beings, we can free ourselves from the endless sufferings of birth and death. The name of that mystic truth is Myoho-renge-kyo, and the way to manifest it is through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.  The Significance of Our Existence as Human Beings Nevertheless, even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching. (WND-1, 3) The concept of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime refers to ordinary people becoming enlightened during the course of their present existences. By extension, it means that they can achieve this just as they are. As such, attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime means the same thing as attaining Buddhahood in one’s present form, which is the Lotus Sutra’s approach to Buddhahood and illustrated by the example of the dragon king’s daughter3 in the sutra’s “Devadatta” chapter. This view contrasts sharply with the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, which expound that one can become enlightened only after practicing austerities over countless lifetimes. Because the life-state of Buddhahood is at one with the eter.nal Mystic Law and abounds with infinite wisdom and compassion, it tended to be seen as some.thing completely separate and removed from the lives of ordinary people steeped in illusion. Attaining enlightenment was thought to require overcoming the unfathomably deep chasm between the spiritual states of a Buddha and ordi.nary people, and this gave rise to the idea that it was necessary to carry out austere practices for innumerable kalpas.4 Nichiren Buddhism clarifies that it is specifi.cally in this present existence, in which we have been born as human beings, that we can actualize the principle of attaining Buddhahood in one’s SGI President Ikeda at Soka University, Hachioji, Tokyo, on May 5, 2006. present form as explained in the Lotus Sutra. And Nichiren Daishonin reveals how to actualize this profound teaching. Drawing an analogy to rice crops, Nichiren notes that while some ripen early and some ripen late, they will all mature and be ready for harvest within the year. He explains that votaries of the Lotus Sutra will likewise attain Buddhahood in this existence without fail.5 Nichiren places importance on the present lifetime of human beings. Of course, not only humans but also all living beings possess the Buddha nature and have the potential to attain Buddhahood in their present form, but Nichiren’s focus is always first and foremost on the happi.ness of human beings. The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted and rich; it has the capacity for magnificent achievement. For that very reason, the heart often undergoes great suffering and torment, and can become trapped in an endless, downward spiral. Will we transmigrate forever along the paths of evil, or can we succeed in directing our lives into an orbit of good? As evidenced in many of his writings, Nichiren repeatedly stresses the crucial impor.tance of the heart, or mind. In this inner realm of life, the potential resides for dramatic shifts from evil to good or from good to evil. That is why Nichiren’s teaching of enlightenment can be viewed as a process that begins with inner change. In other words, through the power of faith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us that are governed by the fundamental darkness in all human hearts and manifest the positive functions of life that are one with the Dharma nature—our Buddhahood. This present lifetime, in which we have been born as human beings, represents a golden opportunity to ensure that our lives no longer transmigrate along the evil paths but instead traverse the paths of good.  Emphasis on Inner Change Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. (WND-1, 3)  Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (WND-1, 4) In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life.time,” Nichiren Daishonin thoroughly explains that we cannot achieve enlightenment without a profound change in our lives, in our hearts and minds. First, he writes that the mystic truth with which all living beings are endowed reveals “the principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena” (WND-1, 3). What this means is that our lives or our minds at each moment both embody all phenomena and pervade all phenomena. This could be described as a life-state of oneness with the universe. Also, Nichiren warns that if we seek the Mystic Law outside ourselves, then no matter how much we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we cannot manifest the condition of enlightenment; on the contrary, our Buddhist practice will only “become an endless, painful austerity” (WND-1, 4). He clearly states: “Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is out.side yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). Nichiren explains that the key to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is summoning up deep faith, or confidence, in the existence of our innate Buddhahood. He declares that when we do so, we can polish our lives and reveal our enlightenment, writing: “Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge [that is, chant Nam-myoho-renge.kyo], you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself [literally, your mind at each moment]” (WND-1, 3). He continues: “Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo” (WND-1, 4). In addition, Nichiren speaks of “the mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality” (WND-1, 4)—in other words, the mystic, inscrutable nature of life, of our hearts and minds, that manifests as Buddhahood. Here, he indicates that Myoho-renge-kyo is the wonderful law of life, of the inner realm of our beings. On that basis, he asserts that when we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in the Mystic Law, we can reveal our Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nichiren writes: “The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life [literally, our mind or inner reality], which manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law. If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime” (WND-1, 4). A Teaching of Genuine Humanism Next, I’ll touch on the significance of Nichiren Daishonin’s teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime from three perspectives. I’ll start by pointing out that through opening the way for all people to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime through chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo, Nichiren established for the first time a teaching of genuine humanism. Opening the way to enlightenment for all people could be called the prerequisite for a genuinely humanistic religion. This, I believe, is the religious or philo.sophical significance of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nichiren had deep insight into the potential of human beings, discerning that they could free themselves from a cycle of negative transmigra.tion and realize a positive one through profound inner change. And he set forth a practical way to enable all people to achieve this. Consequently, there is no other teaching that can more deservedly be called humanistic than Nichiren Buddhism. In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren writes: “Though it is thought that Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the three virtues of sovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake of all of us living beings, that is not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who endow him with the three virtues” (WND-1, 384). This pas.sage describes a shift from an authoritarian to a humanistic, people-centered religion.6 The teaching of Nichiren, who established the con.crete means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime, makes this shift possible. When the Soka Gakkai’s first president, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, formulated his theory of value, he did not include the aspects of “holiness” or “sacredness,” which many thinkers before him had considered to constitute religious value. For Mr. Makiguchi, “great good” was deemed the high.est value a religion should strive to realize. By “great good,” he is referring to the highest value that can be actualized by human beings and society. In Mr. Makiguchi’s theory of value, we find the view that a true religion is one that serves the welfare of human beings. Nichiren’s opening of the path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime signifies the establishment of a religion that contributes to the happiness of human beings in the greatest possible way. The Significance of Attaining Buddhahood for Our Lives Second, by opening the path to attaining Buddha-hood in this lifetime, Nichiren Daishonin made it possible for us to lead lives based on the infinite power of the Mystic Law—that is, to lead solid and secure lives that give us the courage and con.fidence to be self-reliant. This is the significance of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime in terms of our individual lives. In Nichiren Buddhism, attaining enlightenment is not about embarking on some inconceivably long journey to become a resplendent, godlike Buddha; it is about accomplishing a transformation in the depths of one’s being. This revolutionary view of enlightenment fundamentally changed the meaning of Buddhist practice from how it was traditionally viewed. In other words, it is not a matter of practicing in order to scale the highest summit of enlightenment at some point in the distant future. Rather, it is a constant, moment-to-moment, inner struggle between revealing our innate Dharma nature or allowing ourselves to be ruled by our fundamental darkness and delusion. This unceasing effort to pol.ish our lives is the essence of Buddhist practice.  Only by winning over our inner darkness and negativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our full potential. The same is true if we wish to savor true fulfillment. Allow me to emphasize, then, that the Nichiren Buddhist practice toward attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is the only means to conquer the dark.ness and delusion that are the fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate true inde.pendence. It allows us to construct a solid self, and achieve a state of life of boundless happi.ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental purpose of an individual’s life. The Significance of Attaining Buddhahood for Humanity The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life, which manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law. If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states, “After I have passed into extinction, [one] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way.” Never doubt in the slightest. (WND-1, 4) Third, the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is significant in that it offers a source of hope to humanity and opens the way to transforming the destiny of all humankind. This is its collective or universal significance. Many leading thinkers and intellectuals recog.nize that modern civilization has lost sight of the human being and become deadlocked on many fronts. There is no denying that the inner spiritual realm has been neglected and all too many people are obsessed with seeking comfort, ease and pleasure in external things—things outside of themselves. Without surmounting the fundamental human delusions of greed, anger and foolishness, we can.not solve the many problems that the world faces today, including the preoccupation with economic growth, politics that are devoid of humanism, international conflicts, warfare, growing disparity between rich and poor, and rampant discrimina.tion. One conclusion from my dialogues with leading thinkers is that the only real solution is for human beings themselves to change, that the sole key lies in human revolution. It could further be said that without establish.ing a correct view of life and death, it is impossible to conquer inner darkness and delu.sion at the most fundamental level. Without the Middle Way view of life and death—a view that rejects the extremes of the doctrine of annihila.tion and the doctrine of eternity7—true and lasting happiness cannot be achieved. The only way for human beings to change is for them to conquer their inner darkness and rediscover the eternal dignity within their own lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people are originally endowed will directly lead to a change in the destiny of humankind. With that conviction, we of the SGI have been working to build a network of good all around the globe. In the course of these lectures, I will comment further on the growing expectations and praise for this unprecedented endeavor we are undertaking. At the end of “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren Daishonin writes: “Never doubt in the slightest” (WND-1, 4). He is telling us that we should have complete confidence in the revealing of our Buddhahood in this lifetime. His words also contain the warning that unless we maintain this strong confidence, or faith, we can easily lose sight of the fundamental goal of attain.ing Buddhahood in this lifetime and fall into the depths of darkness and delusion. All people at the core of their lives yearn to attain enlightenment. But there is no teaching more difficult to believe or understand than the teaching that we can definitely manifest the state of Buddhahood in our present existence. We of the SGI have taken on the challenge of practicing this profound teaching and sharing it widely with others around the globe. In today’s world, we, the courageous Bodhi.sattvas of the Earth, are showing great actual proof of humankind’s potential to transform its destiny. Proud of our noble mission, let us continue to joyously spread Nichiren Buddhism— with its teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime that enables all people to achieve unsur.passed happiness—and lead the most valuable and fulfilling lives possible. 1. Toki Jonin: A lay follower of Nichiren Daishonin. He lived in Wakamiya, Katsushika District of Shimosa Province (part of present-day Chiba Prefec.ture) and served as a retainer to Lord Chiba. He was the recipient of many of Nichiren’s writings, including “The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” and carefully preserved them. 2. In “How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus Sutra,” Nichiren writes: “When we revere Myoho-renge.kyo inherent in our own life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature within us is summoned forth and manifested by our chanting of Nam.myoho-renge-kyo. This is what is meant by ‘Buddha.’ To illustrate, when a caged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby summoned and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in the cage strives to get out. When with our mouths we chant the Mystic Law, our Buddha nature, being summoned, will invariably emerge” (WND-1, 887). 3. In “Devadatta,” the twelfth chapter of the Lotus Sutra, the eight-year-old daughter of the dragon king Sagara conceives the desire for enlightenment when she hears Bodhisattva Manjushri preach the Lotus Sutra. She comes to offers a jewel to Shakyamuni and instantaneously perfects the bodhi.sattva practice. She then appears in a land to the south called Spotless World and manifests the state of Buddhahood without changing her dragon form and preaches the Lotus Sutra to all living beings there (see The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, pp. 226 –28). 4. In ancient Indian cosmology, an extremely long period of time. 5. In his writing “The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms in a Single Moment of Life,” Nichiren states: “If votaries of the Lotus Sutra carry out religious practice as the sutra directs, then every one of them without exception will surely  attain Buddhahood within his or her present lifetime. To cite an analogy, if one plants the fields in spring and summer, then, whether it be early or late, one is certain to reap a harvest within the year. Votaries of the Lotus Sutra fall into three categories, superior, middling, inferior, depending upon their capacities, and yet all will invariably attain enlightenment within a single lifetime” (WND-2, 88). 6. For SGI President Ikeda’s detailed discussion of this passage, see the December 2004 Living Buddhism, p. 25. 7. The doctrine of annihilation is the mistaken attachment to the notion that life begins with birth and ends with death. According to this view, there is only the present life, and death represents a complete cessation of existence both physical and spiritual. The doctrine of eternity is also the mistaken notion that what exists here in the present is permanent and unchanging. This view rejects causality, so that neither practicing good nor practicing evil produces any change in one’s condition. Key Points Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Terms of Faith and Practice In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo has two aspects: the chanting of Nam.myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and chanting  in terms of practice. Chanting in terms of faith refers to the spiritual aspect of our practice. This essen.tially consists of the struggle we wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or darkness—a battle against the negative and destructive forces within us. It means that through the power of faith—in other words, through strengthening our conviction that we possess the Buddha nature—we can break through the darkness obscuring this awareness, thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood. Chant.ing in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves and also teaching it to others. It means making efforts in word and deed for our own and others’ happiness in the course of our spiritual struggle against inner negativity and illusion. (p. 3) The Heart Is Most Important The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted and rich; it has the capacity for magnificent achievement. For that very reason, the heart often undergoes great suffering and torment, and can become trapped in an endless, downward spiral. Will we transmigrate forever along the paths of evil, or can we succeed in directing our lives into an orbit of good? As evi.denced in many of his writings, Nichiren repeatedly stresses the crucial importance of the heart, or mind. In this inner realm of life, the potential resides for dramatic shifts from evil to good or from good to evil. That is why Nichiren’s teaching of enlighten.ment can be viewed as a process that begins with inner change. In other words, through the power of faith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us that are governed by the fundamental darkness in all human hearts and manifest the positive functions of life that are one with the Dharma nature—our Buddhahood. (p. 5) A Humanistic, People-centered Religion Nichiren had deep insight into the potential of human beings, discerning that they could free them.selves from a cycle of negative transmigration and realize a positive one through profound inner change. And he set forth a practical way to enable all people to achieve this. Consequently, there is no other teaching that can more deservedly be called humanistic than Nichiren Buddhism. In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren writes: “Though it is thought that Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the three virtues of sovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake of all of us living beings, that is not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who endow him with the three virtues” (WND-1, 384). This passage describes a shift from an authoritarian to a humanistic, people-centered religion. The teaching of Nichiren, who established the concrete means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime, makes this shift possible. (p. 7) The Fundamental Purpose of Our Lives Only by winning over our inner darkness and neg.ativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our full potential. The same is true if we wish to savor true fulfillment. Allow me to emphasize, then, that the Nichiren Buddhist practice toward attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is the only means to conquer the darkness and delusion that are the fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate true independence. It allows us to construct a solid self, and achieve a state of life of boundless happi.ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental pur.pose of an individual’s life. (p. 8) Changing the Destiny of All Humanity The only way for human beings to change is for them to conquer their inner darkness and redis.cover the eternal dignity within their own lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people are originally endowed will directly lead to a change in the destiny of humankind. With that conviction, we of the SGI have been working to build a network of good all around the globe. (p. 9) On Attaining In This Lifetime [2] The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo— Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through Correct Buddhist Practice  The practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo contains immeasurable benefit, for it enables us to summon forth in our own lives the limitless power of the Mystic Law, the fundamental law of the universe. Nichiren Daishonin actualized happiness for all humankind through the boundless beneficial power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The doctrinal basis for this endeavor is set forth with great sim.plicity and conciseness in the opening passage of “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime”: “If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life” (The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3). This passage encapsulates the profound prin.ciples of Buddhism and the religious revolution to bring about the enlightenment of all people that was begun by Shakyamuni Buddha and com.pleted by Nichiren. Each word and phrase is infused with the sublime wisdom of Buddhism. “To free oneself from the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning” relates to the fundamental questions of human existence and the original purpose of religion. “To attain unsurpassed enlightenment” constitutes the profound Buddhist response to these ques.tions. “To perceive the mystic truth inherent in all living beings” is this response further refined and deepened based on the philosophy of the Lotus Sutra. And “chanting Myoho-renge-kyo” refers to the practice established by Nichiren to enable all people to translate this Buddhist wisdom into action. The realization of this practice is the fruit of great compassion that aspires for the happiness of all people, and indicates the truly revolutionary nature of Nichiren Buddhism. Through this passage as a whole, it becomes clear that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo established by Nichiren is the correct and supreme Buddhist practice. Indeed, the short opening passage succinctly articulates the pro.found insights of Buddhism distilled over more than two millennia, and the compassion and wisdom for leading all people to enlightenment found in Nichiren Buddhism. The purpose of this installment is to confirm that Nichiren’s practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo represents the ultimate form of correct Buddhist practice, and that its establishment marks the start of a genuinely people-centered Buddhism that makes it possible for all humankind to achieve the same enlightened state as the Buddha.  Attaining a State of Eternal Happiness If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is orig.inally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in all life. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3) Let us start by considering the profound meaning of the opening phrase, “If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have endured since time without beginning . . . ” Nichiren Daishonin’s reference to “the suffer.ings of birth and death endured since time without beginning” is premised on the concept of transmigration, according to which living beings undergo an unceasing, suffering-filled cycle of  birth and death that continues from the infinite past into the infinite future. Buddhism holds that this never-ending round of suffering ultimately arises from earthly desires, and that a negative cycle of earthly desires, karma and suffering is part and parcel of transmigration. In this sense, “the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning” also represents an inter.minable succession of illusion and suffering. Because the thought of such endless transmi.gration is ultimately unbearable, people naturally came to wish for a way to put an end to this painful cycle and free themselves from the chains of delusion and suffering. In Buddhism, there are two basic approaches to liberation from the suffering of this cycle. One view holds that people can free themselves from the endless karmic cycle of birth and death by eradicating earthly desires believed to cause it. The other is the Mahayana approach, in which the essence of life that undergoes transmigration is not viewed as a transient, impermanent phenomenon. The Mahayana teachings, for example, espouse the concept of undergoing the cycle of birth and death in accordance with the bodhisattva vow to guide living beings to enlightenment; or they view the oscillation between birth and death as a cycle of emerging from and returning to the funda.mental, all-embracing life of the universe. The latter view can be easily understood using the metaphor of waves on the ocean: birth is like a wave appearing on the surface of the ocean—the life of the universe—while death is the wave sub.merging back into that ocean. Gaining such an understanding of the essence of our own lives, which repeat the cycle of birth and death, is to attain “unsurpassed enlightenment,” the highest awakening of the Buddha. The Mystic Truth Embraces and Is Inherent in All Things In this passage, to “perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings” means to “attain unsurpassed enlightenment.” The wisdom to apprehend this universally inherent truth repre.sents the supreme enlightenment of the Buddha. The point where Buddhism radically departs from many other philosophies and religions is that it uncovered within the individual’s own life the Law, or limitless inner power, for resolving all suffering on the most essential level. A Buddha is one who, based on this Law, has attained the ulti.mate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and construct indestructible happiness. Buddhism is a teaching of unparalleled humanism that stresses the boundless potential within human beings. That’s why it is called the “internal way.” To “perceive the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings” is to “attain unsur.passed enlightenment”; it is the sole means for freeing oneself from “the sufferings of birth and death endured since time without beginning.” This is Shakyamuni’s starting point, and the entirety of Buddhist thought. The scripture that proclaims this philosophy of the “internal way” is the Lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people can attain enlightenment. The Lotus Sutra could be said to embody the ultimate principle of respect for human dignity. In this writing, Nichiren Daishonin says that the “mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings” is the “principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena.” This latter principle refers to the inscrutable relationship that exists between ourselves—our minds or each life-moment—and the universe; its meaning is that all phenomena are contained in one’s life and that one’s life pervades all phenomena. This principle no doubt corresponds in meaning to the “principle of inherence and pervasion”1 articulated by Nichikan, an early eighteenth-century restorer of Nichiren Buddhism, in describing the doc.trine of “three thousand realms in a single moment of life.” The cosmic life enfolds and pervades every.thing, and because it does so, it is also inherent in all things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our individual lives lies at the heart of the “principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena.” To awaken to this mystic truth is to attain the Buddha’s “unsur.passed enlightenment.” Naming the Mystic Truth The question is how to enable all people to per.ceive this “mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings.” A widely accessible Buddhism will not be possible if only a very limited number of people can follow the way set forth for apprehending the mystic truth. Before Nichiren Daishonin, the Great Teacher T’ien.t’ai of China tried to establish the means for perceiving this mystic truth through the prac.tice of observing the mind, also known as the practice of concentration and insight. But it was not a means readily accessible to the people of the Latter Day of the Law. The initial step Nichiren took in opening the great path to universal enlightenment was to name the mystic truth. The universally inherent mystic truth originally had no name, but as Nichiren explains in “The Entity of the Mystic Law,” a sage awakened to this truth in his own life could give it the most appropriate name (see WND-1, 421).2 Naming something is a creative process. Giving a name that accurately grasps the essence of a thing has the important effect of making that essence available to all people; it enables all people to share in its value. In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life.time,” as indicated by the passage “the mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings is Myoho-renge-kyo,” Nichiren states that this mystic truth that constitutes the fundamental Law of the universe is none other than Myoho.renge-kyo. Strictly speaking, the term Myoho.renge-kyo existed prior to this as the title of the Lotus Sutra, but Nichiren was the first to identify Myoho-renge-kyo as being the name of the prin.ciple of the “true aspect of all phenomena,”3 which the Lotus Sutra teaches is the profound wisdom of all Buddhas. Also, although the “Life Span” chapter of the Lotus Sutra expounds the life of the eternal Buddha from the standpoint of Shakyamuni, it was Nichiren who first revealed that the essence of the Buddha’s eternal life—the “heart of the ‘Life Span’ chapter”—is Myoho.renge-kyo (see “The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” WND-1, 371). The eternal Buddha, since attaining enlighten.ment in the remote past, repeatedly undergoes the cycle of birth and death as a Buddha while appear.ing in various forms within the Ten Worlds4 for the salvation of all living beings. The “Life Span” chap.ter reveals that living beings of the Ten Worlds (including Buddhas), and the phenomena of birth and death as well, are all manifestations of the great eternal life of the universe. Because Nichiren says that the “heart of the ‘Life Span’ chapter” is Myoho.renge-kyo, we can infer that Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the great, eternal, universal life that is revealed in the “Life Span” chapter. Living beings in the nine worlds, repeatedly undergoing birth and death, also follow the rhythm of birth and death of emerging from and submerging back into the great eternal life that is Myoho-renge-kyo. They are embraced by Myoho-renge-kyo, and at the same time possess Myoho-renge-kyo within them. This is why  Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the “mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings.” It was Nichiren who first declared that Myoho-renge-kyo is to be chanted and spread in the Latter Day of the Law. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo To Perceive the Mystic Truth and Establish the Buddhism of the People The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, true and correct in both word and prin.ciple. Its words are the ultimate reality, and this reality is the Mystic Law (myoho). It is called the Mystic Law because it reveals the principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena. That is why this sutra is the wisdom of all Buddhas. Life at each moment encompasses the body and mind and the self and environment of all sentient beings in the Ten Worlds as well as all insentient beings in the three thousand realms, including plants, sky, earth, and even the minutest particles of dust. Life at each moment permeates the entire realm of phenomena and is revealed in all phenomena. To be awakened to this principle is itself the mutually inclusive relationship of life at each moment and all phenomena. (WND-1, 3) Nichiren Daishonin’s next step in opening this great path was to establish the prac.tice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. He appended the word nam—a transliteration of the Sanskrit word namas, meaning “devotion”— to the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo, and established the practice of invoking this truth. Nam means “to dedicate one’s life.” Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo aloud represents a deter.mination and vow to dedicate one’s life to the realm of truth of Myoho-renge-kyo in thought, word and deed. At the same time, chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo enables each person to actualize a way of life based on the universal truth of Myoho.renge-kyo. The crucial point in chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an external truth. It constitutes a practice to actually summon forth the inner truth that pervades the universe and our own selves and live our lives in accord with that truth. This practice could be described as a process of establishing a self capable of activating and tapping from within the “mystic truth origi.nally inherent in all living beings.” Looking back on the history of Buddhism, even though the Lotus Sutra has taught the awakening to this mystic truth, over time people lost sight of its existence within their own lives. It was in that context that T’ien-t’ai established the meditative practice for observing the mind based on the principles of “three thousand BUDDHISM IN A NEW LIGHT Eighteen Essays That Illuminate Our Buddhist Practice by shin yatomi This compilation of insightful essays by Shin Yatomi explores topics such as the meaning of freedom and the difference between arrogance and confidence, each essay clarifying the meaning of faith and practice for Nichiren Buddhists. By applying the humanistic teachings that are reiterated in this small book, you will learn of the unconditional value of all life, and what love is and what it is not. You will be encouraged to develop an authentic Buddhist sense of peace and justice. Available at your local SGI-USA Paperback . 179 pages . 5"x7" bookstore or from:Price $3.95 . SKU #4150 (800) 626-1313 . bookstore.sgi-usa.org  realms in a single moment of life” and the “mutu.ally inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena.” He thereby sought to enable people to summon forth the world of Buddhahood. T’ien-t’ai’s meditation of observ.ing the mind could be viewed as an appropriate practice that restored the correct path of the Lotus Sutra. Further, in order to enable all people to perceive and actualize the “mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings,” Nichiren gave it the name Myoho-renge-kyo and established the prac.tice of invoking that name—the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. By doing so, he opened the way for all people to dedicate their lives to and live based on the mystic truth. Thus Nichiren established the means by which all people can awaken to the truth of life and the universe within their own lives and actively manifest that truth. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no mat.ter what his or her background. It would be no exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This prac.tice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fundamen.tally transform our lives. In other words, to chant Nam-myoho-renge.kyo is to summon forth our own innate Buddhahood.5 It is the direct path to manifesting that highest state of life. The wisdom and com.passion of a Buddha that emerges through chanting enriches our life-condition, and brings happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as more and more people come to chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha and to ultimately transform even the destiny of humankind. Salute to the Rise of the Buddhism of the Sun Another point we should bear in mind regarding the true meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it is also the name of the life of the Buddha of the Latter Day, Nichiren Daishonin. Nam.myoho-renge-kyo and the life of the original Buddha are indivisibly connected. We could say that the fundamental truth of Myoho-renge-kyo that pervades life and the universe was only iden.tified and established for the first time through Nichiren himself practicing it and manifesting it in his behavior. He gave concrete expression to the Law that people had not been able to perceive up to that point. Nichiren’s life as the Buddha of the Latter Day is a life dedicated to battling evil and vanquishing ignorance. The struggle to free people from all misfortune and misery in the world—from all negative karma and the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness and death—ultimately entails battling the fundamental darkness or ignorance that gives rise to all evil and suffering. On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime As Nichiren indicates when he says that the Nam-myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the hap.piness of self and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu clears “the clouds of ignorance” (see “The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms,” WND-2, 85), Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly has the power to dispel life’s darkness. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the sun of Bud.dhahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the sun, are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance vanishes. But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching in which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We are truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same brilliant life-state of Buddhahood as Nichiren. In this regard, Nichikan writes: “When one embraces and has faith in this Gohonzon and chants Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, one’s life imme.diately becomes the object of devotion of three thousand realms in a single life-moment. It becomes the life of Nichiren Daishonin.”6 The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the supreme path to attaining Buddhahood through which each person can become a shining sun in his or her own right. The great nineteenth-century Russian poet Aleksandr Pushkin sings: “Before the bright dawn, even so / Shall flicker and die every sophistry jaded / At reason’s unperishing spark. / Salute to the sunrise, and vanish the dark!”7 Nichiren Buddhism is the Buddhism of the sun that opens the path of life’s supreme victory for all humankind. With “Salute to the sunrise!” as our rallying cry, let us dynamically advance in the struggle to dispel the darkness of ignorance in people’s hearts. 1. Commenting on T’ien-t’ai’s words, “The three thousand realms exist in life at each moment,” Nichikan writes in his Six-Volume Writings: “The intent of [the Lotus Sutra] is to reveal the principle of ‘inherence and pervasion.’ According to this principle, all phenomena inhere in a single moment of life, and a single moment of life pervades all phenomena.” 2. Nichiren Daishonin writes: “This passage of commentary means that the supreme principle [that is the Mystic Law] was originally without a name. When the sage was observing the principle and assigning names to all things, he perceived that there is this wonderful single Law [myoho] that simultaneously possesses both cause and effect [renge], and he named it Myoho-renge. This single Law that is Myoho-renge encompasses within it all the phenomena comprising the Ten Worlds and the three thousand realms, and is lacking in none of them. Anyone who practices this Law will obtain both the cause and the effect of Buddhahood simultaneously” (“The Entity of the Mystic Law,” WND-1, 421). 3. True aspect of all phenomena: The ultimate truth or reality that permeates all phenomena and is in no way separate from them. A principle expressed in “Expedient Means,” the second chapter of the Lotus Sutra. In the writ.ing titled “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren defined “all phenomena” as all living beings and their environments in the Ten Worlds, and “the true aspect” as the Law of Myoho-renge-kyo, the ultimate reality permeating all living beings and their environments in any of the Ten Worlds. All phenomena, he stated, are manifestations of this universal Law; phenomena and the ultimate truth are inseparable and non-dual. The “Expedient Means” chapter clarifies the truth that all people are inherently endowed with the potential to become Buddhas, and can tap and manifest this potential. 4. The Ten Worlds are ten distinct realms or categories of beings referred to in Buddhist scriptures. From the lowest to the highest, the realms of (1) hell, (2) hungry spirits, (3) animals, (4) asuras, (5) human beings, (6) heavenly beings, (7) voice-hearers, (8) cause-awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and (10) Buddhas. From the standpoint of the Lotus Sutra, the Ten Worlds indi.cates ten potential states or conditions that a person can manifest or experience. Also includes the concept of the nine worlds, which indicates all the worlds other than Buddhas. 5. Nichiren writes: “Therefore, when once we chant Myoho-renge-kyo, with just that single sound we summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of all Buddhas; all existences; all bodhisattvas; all voice-hearers; all the deities such as Brahma, Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and the myriad stars; the heavenly gods and earthly deities, on down to hell-dwellers, hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human and heavenly beings, and all other living beings. This blessing is immeasurable and boundless” (“How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus Sutra,” WND-1, 887). 6. Commentary on the “The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” in Nichikan Shonin mondanshu (The Commentaries of Nichikan Shonin) (Tokyo: Seikyo Shimbunsha, 1980), p. 548. 7. Aleksandr Pushkin, Pushkin Threefold: Narrative, Lyric, Polemic, and Ribald Verse, translated by Walter Arndt (New York: E. P. Dutton and Co., Inc., 1972), p. 20. Key Points Uncovering People’s Inner Potential The point where Buddhism radically departs from many other philosophies and religions is that it uncovered within the individual’s own life the Law, or limitless inner power, for resolving all suffering on the most essential level. A Buddha is one who, based on this Law, has attained the ultimate wis.dom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and construct indestructible happiness. Buddhism is a teaching of unparalleled humanism that stresses the boundless potential within human beings. That’s why it is called the “internal way.” (p. 13) The Mystic Truth of Life and the Universe The cosmic life enfolds and pervades everything, and because it does so, it is also inherent in all things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our indi.vidual lives lies at the heart of the “principle of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena.” To awaken to this mys.tic truth is to attain the Buddha’s “unsurpassed enlightenment.” (p. 14) The Meaning of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables each per.son to actualize a way of life based on the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo. The crucial point in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an external truth. It constitutes a practice to actually summon forth the inner truth that pervades the universe and our own selves and live our lives in accord with that truth. This practice could be described as a process of establishing a self capable of activating and tapping from within the “mystic truth originally inherent in all living beings.” (p. 16) Establishing a Buddhism of the People Nichiren established the means by which all people can awaken to the truth of life and the universe within their own lives and actively manifest that truth. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth accessible to anyone, anywhere, any.time, no matter what his or her background. It would be no exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This practice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fun.damentally transform our lives. (p. 17) The Direct Path to Manifesting Buddhahood To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to summon forth our own innate Buddhahood. It is the direct path to manifesting that highest state of life. The wisdom and compassion of a Buddha that emerges through chanting enriches our life-condition, and brings happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as more and more people come to chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha and to ultimately transform even the destiny of humankind. (p. 17) Causing the Sun of Buddhahood To Rise Within As Nichiren indicates when he says that the Nam.myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the happiness of self and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu clears “the clouds of ignorance” (see “The Doctrine of the Three Thousand Realms,” WND-2, 85), Nam.myoho-renge-kyo truly has the power to dispel life’s darkness. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the sun of Buddhahood rises in our hearts. The igno.rance and delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the sun, are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance vanishes. But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching in which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We are truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same bril.liant life-state of Buddhahood as Nichiren. (p. 18) On Attaining In This Lifetime [3] “If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, You Are Not Embracing the Mystic Law”  Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching. “Inferior teaching” means those [Buddhist teachings] other than this [Lotus] sutra, which are all expedient and provisional. No expedient or provi.sional teaching leads directly to enlightenment, and without the direct path to enlightenment you cannot attain Buddhahood, even if you practice lifetime after lifetime for countless kalpas. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is then impossible. Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge,1 you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3) To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to com-vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance mune with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist and become one with the Mystic Law, its infinite practice for fusing our lives with this Law. power unfolds in our lives. Such is the immeasur-At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the able benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. inner darkness that prevents this fusion from tak-The essence of this practice established and ing place. When, through our practice of faith, we propagated by Nichiren Daishonin is to chant  Nam-myoho-renge-kyo filled with a seeking spirit to continually develop our faith or confi.dence in its power. “It is the heart that is important,” Nichiren asserts (“The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra,” WND-1, 1000). When it comes to chanting, therefore, we should above all strive to summon forth the courage with which to over.come illusion without being defeated by the “three obstacles and four devils.”2 Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the ultimate mystic truth, and Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the life-state of Buddhas who embody and reveal this truth. Thus, when we chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo with conviction, the infinite benefit of Myoho-renge-kyo unfolds in our lives. This is what it means to bring forth the world of Buddhahood. At work here is the principle of “cause and effect in a single moment of life,”3 in which faith is the cause and manifesting the life-state of Bud.dhahood is the effect. When we continue chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo through times of both suffering and joy while striving for our own happiness and that of others, we can estab.lish as the core and innermost essence of our lives the benefit of the cause and effect for attaining Buddhahood—which are themselves contained within the practice of chanting. When we do so, the indomitable state of Buddhahood emerges within us. This is the meaning of “attaining Bud.dhahood in this lifetime.” In his treatise “The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” Nichiren states: “Shakya.muni Buddha, who has attained perfect enlightenment, is our own flesh and blood. His practices and the resulting virtues are our bones and marrow” (WND-1, 365). He explains that to embrace Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself attaining enlightenment.4 The power of chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo enables us to actualize cause and effect in a single moment of life—that is, faith (cause) leading to the manifestation of our Buddhahood (effect). Considered in this light, one’s voice chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the voice of unshak.able faith and seeking spirit that breaks through the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is also the courageous lion’s roar that issues forth from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of chanting. The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is not only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we should always try to chant resoundingly, with a vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop.ing horse. It can also be said that the chanting of Nam.myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities of Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to return to our true, original selves and tap the innate life force that we have possessed from time without beginning. Nichiren declares: “There is no true happiness for human beings other than chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo” (“Happiness in This World,” WND-1, 681). This happiness, he says, is the “boundless joy of the Law.”5 “Joy of the Law” describes the unshakable happiness and peace of mind inherent in all existence. To experience this joy means to fully savor and enjoy the infi.nite life force that is one with the Mystic Law. Nichiren explains that the only way for us to taste the joy of the Mystic Law is through chant.ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The Mystic Law and Incomplete Teachings Given that chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has such profound meaning, it is crucial to remember when we chant that Myoho-renge-kyo is our lives themselves. If we lose sight of this point, then no matter how much we may chant, we will have departed from the practice of chanting taught by Nichiren Daishonin. Therefore, in “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren writes in stern warning, “Even though you chant and believe in Myoho.renge-kyo, if you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an infe.rior teaching” (WND-1, 3). “Inferior” here means “incomplete.” The Mystic Law is the ultimate truth that is perfect and complete; in contrast, an incom.plete teaching sets forth only a partial truth. The above passage contains a profound phi.losophy that overcomes one of the serious pitfalls to which religion tends to succumb. It also embodies a crucial philosophy of faith for attain.ing genuine happiness. Religion is generally held to be a universal endeavor to connect the human being to the infi.nite, absolute and sacred. While in a sense this may be true, it seems that many religions postulate from the outset a separation between the secular and the sacred, and between human beings and gods or Buddhas, and thus seek to bridge that gap. Nichiren, however, regards teachings that view the absolute or sacred as separate from human beings as incomplete. And he cites as an example the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, which do not set forth the principles or practices that enable ordinary people to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Rather, they espouse that one must first undergo innumerable kalpas 6 of austere practice before enlightenment can be achieved. In the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, a virtually insurmountable gulf exists between Buddhas and ordinary people. Only a very few exceptional practitioners who, after having undergone austerities for countless kalpas, can even attempt to reach the goal of enlightenment. Moreover, according to these teachings, it is inconceivable for someone who has become a Buddha to go back to being an ordinary person. As a rule, according to these teachings, the world where Buddhas dwell is not this strife-filled saha world where ordinary people reside. Buddhas and ordinary people are completely separate. There.fore, as long as that divide exists between the world of Buddhahood and the nine worlds (the realm of ordinary beings), it naturally follows that there is no way for all people to attain enlightenment. In this worldview, ordinary peo.ple and the idealized Buddhas are poles apart, thus leaving ordinary people with no option but to aspire for salvation through the assistance or intervention of such Buddhas. This perceived separation between the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood7 is demol.ished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of “three thousand realms in a single moment of life”— in other words, the teaching that “the nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds” (“The Selection of the Time,” WND-1, 539).8 Here we can see the immense importance of the Lotus Sutra principle of the “mutual possession of the Ten Worlds.” Nichiren opened the way to actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to attaining Bud.dhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This constitutes in its fullest and most complete form the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlighten.ment for all human beings. SGI President Ikeda with Brazilian Association of Municipalities President José do Carmo Garcia, Tokyo, July 20, 2006. Summoning Forth and Manifesting the Buddha Nature The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the universe. Its universality transcends our individ.ual selves. As indicated by its description as the “mystic truth that is originally inherent in all liv.ing beings,” however, the Mystic Law also exists within our lives (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” WND-1, 3). It both resides within us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in our lives because it is the all-embracing Law that pervades everything in the universe. In his writing “How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus Sutra,” Nichiren explains the essence of Myoho-renge-kyo as follows: “As for the meaning of Myoho-renge-kyo: The Buddha nature inher.ent in us, ordinary people; the Buddha nature of Brahma, Shakra, and the other deities; the Bud.dha nature of Shariputra, Maudgalyayana, and the other voice-hearers; the Buddha nature of Manjushri, Maitreya, and the other bodhisattvas; and the Mystic Law that is the enlightenment of the Buddhas of the three existences, are one and identical. This principle is called Myoho-renge.kyo” (WND-1, 887). Not only is Myoho-renge-kyo our own Bud.dha nature, he says, but it is also the Buddha nature of all heavenly deities, voice-hearers, bodhisattvas and so on. Moreover, this Buddha nature is identical to the Mystic Law to which the Buddhas of the three existences—past, present and future—are enlightened. Nichiren then goes on to explain that the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a practice in which we “summon forth and manifest” the Buddha nature inherent in the lives of all beings of the Ten Worlds: “Therefore, when once we chant Myoho-renge-kyo, with just that single sound we summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of all Buddhas; all existences; all bodhisattvas; all voice-hearers; all the deities such as Brahma, Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and the myriad stars; the heavenly gods and earthly deities, on down to hell-dwellers, hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human and heavenly beings, and all other living beings. This blessing is immeasur.able and boundless” (WND-1, 887). Regarding the meaning of chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo, he further states: “When we revere Myoho-renge-kyo inherent in our own life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature within us is summoned forth and manifested by our chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This is what is meant by ‘Buddha’” (WND-1, 887). The expression “is summoned forth and manifested” points to the profound significance of the Mystic Law. Nichiren uses a wonderful metaphor to explain this principle of calling forth and reveal.ing the inner Buddha nature: “When a caged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby summoned and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in the cage strives to get out” (WND-1, 887). The singing of the caged bird refers to the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo by ordinary people who, shackled in the chains of fundamen.tal darkness and earthly desires, arouse faith in the Mystic Law. In other words, it is the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith, which is expressed as the determination to win over all obstacles and become happy without fail through the power of the Mystic Law. The power of such strong, determined chant.ing calls forth the Buddha nature in all living beings. Not only does the Buddha nature of Brahma and Shakra and of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the universe manifest, but those chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can also sever the chains of fundamental darkness and illusion, and reveal their own Buddha nature. In other words, it is the power of our voices chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that connects our lives with the Mystic Law pervading all phe.nomena of the three thousand realms.9 In “Letter to Niike,” Nichiren further explains the significance of chanting through the analogy of a mother bird and an egg.10 He says that the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is “like the warmth of the mother bird” (WND-1, 1030). At first there is nothing inside the egg but liquid, but as a result of being warmed by the mother bird, the beak, eyes and feathers are formed. Eventually, the baby bird breaks through the shell and hatches, and is soon flying into the sky like its mother. In this analogy, the substance within the egg repre.sents the Buddha nature of living beings, while the mother bird represents the Buddha who leads others to enlightenment. The chanting of Nam.myoho-renge-kyo is at once the voice of faith of ordinary people and a function of the life-state of Buddhahood. Nichiren’s most important admonition in regard to attaining enlightenment through chant.ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that we must not view the Law as something outside ourselves. If we think the Law exists externally, then we are reverting to the kind of divide between Buddhas and ordinary people found in the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings. Perceiving That One’s Own Life Is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has immeasurable beneficial power. Josei Toda, the  second Soka Gakkai president, described the infi.nite power of the Mystic Law as follows: “It is like lying sprawled on your back in a wide-open space looking up at the sky. All that you wish for imme.diately appears. No matter how much you may give away, there is always more. It is never exhausted. Try and see if you can attain this state of life.” Indeed, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can be likened to a “wish-granting jewel.” How can we develop the boundless state of life that enables us to bring forth whatever strength is necessary? President Toda often used to say, “If you really want to achieve such a state of life, you have to fight with every ounce of your being for the Lotus Sutra, for kosen-rufu!” Such was the vast and untrammeled spirit of my mentor: the spirit to strive forever together with the Buddhas of the three existences and with the life-affirming functions of the universe such as Brahma and Shakra, wherever in the universe we might find ourselves; the spirit to actualize a world of happiness and peace dedicated to value creation, by helping people overcome misery and misfortune and the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness and death. Throughout everything, Mr. Toda steadfastly continued to seek the Law that exists nowhere but within our own lives. And he stressed the importance of living true to oneself. His starting point was his profound realization in prison that the Buddha is life itself and his awakening to his identity as a Bodhisattva of the Earth. He also often spoke of the spirit of faith we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law with.in us, saying: “You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is your own life!” or “Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day means firmly believing that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myoho-renge-kyo!” This is the spirit Nichiren teaches in the passage, “When you chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself” (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life.time,” WND-1, 3). A Universal Religion for the Happiness of All Humankind Generally speaking, religions expound some infi.nite and eternal entity that transcends both human beings and the impermanence of this world, using such terms as God or law. Different religions regard this infinite and eternal entity variously as a source of fear and awe, an object of adoration, a great void of emptiness or a wellspring of all-embracing love. Nichiren Daishonin saw the power of the Mystic Law that encompasses and sustains all things in the universe as existing within human beings, and he established a means for actually manifesting that Law in their lives. During my second lecture at Harvard Univer.sity (in September 1993), I proposed three areas where Mahayana Buddhism could contribute to modern civilization: (1) in fostering the creation of peace; (2) in paving the way toward the restora.tion and rejuvenation of humanity; and (3) in providing a philosophical basis for the symbiotic coexistence of all things. In connection with the second point, I stressed the important significance of the approach of Nichiren Buddhism, which teaches neither an exclusive reliance on the “power of self” nor on the “power of other.” This perspec.tive has resonated deeply with many scholars. On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime Only by communing and fusing with the power of other—which is eternal and transcends our limited, finite selves—can we wholly activate the power of self. At the same time, however, this eternal, all-encompassing power of other actually exists inherently in our lives. Nichiren writes: “People are certainly self-empowered, and yet they are not self-empowered . . . People are cer.tainly other-empowered, and yet they are not other-empowered” (“The Meaning of the Sacred Teachings of the Buddha’s Lifetime,” WND-2, 62).11 What this means, I believe, is that by relying neither exclusively on the power of other nor on the power of self, we can manifest the power that exists within us yet transcends our selves. Chant.ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to do this. In this way, Nichiren Buddhism opens up a broad new vision of a universal religion for the happiness of all humankind—one that tran.scends the approach of teachings that strictly divide external power and the individual’s own power and that emphasize one over the other. 1. “Chant myoho and recite renge” means chanting the daimoku, or name or title, of the Mystic Law—Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 2. Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. 3. Cause and effect in a single moment of life: This principle teaches that the cause and effect of attaining Buddhahood exist in the lives of all people at each moment. Faith and practice based on the Mys.tic Law are the causes that instantly enable us to attain Buddhahood and manifest the virtues of the world of Buddhahood inherent in our lives. 4. Embracing Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself enlightenment: The Mys.tic Law is the fundamental Law by which all Buddhas throughout past, present and future attain enlightenment. Nichiren perceived the Mystic Law in his own life and manifested it in the concrete form of the Gohonzon, the object of fundamental devotion. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith in this Gohonzon constitutes the practice of observing one’s mind in order to attain Buddhahood by perceiving the Mystic Law within one’s own life. This is the principle of “embracing the Gohonzon is in itself attaining enlightenment.” 5. Boundless joy of the Law: This refers to the benefit one obtains from embracing the Mystic Law. It describes the enlightened state of a Buddha. In his writing “Happiness in This World,” Nichiren states: “There is no true happiness for human beings other than chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The [Lotus] sutra reads, ‘…where living beings enjoy themselves at ease’ [The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 272]. How could this passage mean anything but the boundless joy of the Law?” (WND-1, 681). 6. An extremely long period of time. Sutras and treatises differ in their definitions, but kalpas fall into two major categories, those of meas.urable and immeasurable duration. One explanation sets the length of a small kalpa at approximately sixteen million years. According to Buddhist cosmology, a world repeatedly undergoes four stages: formation, continuance, decline and disintegration. Each of these four stages lasts for twenty small kalpas and is equal to one medium kalpa. Finally, one complete cycle forms a major kalpa. 7. The Ten Worlds are ten distinct realms or categories of beings referred to in Buddhist scriptures. From the lowest to the highest, the realms of (1) hell, (2) hungry spirits, (3) animals, (4) asuras, (5) human beings, (6) heavenly beings, (7) voice-hearers, (8) cause-awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and (10) Buddhas. The Lotus Sutra teaches that each of the Ten Worlds contains all ten within it, making it possible to interpret them as potential states of life inher.ent in each individual being. 8. “The nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and Buddha-hood retains the nine worlds”: This means that that the lives of beings in the nine worlds—the worlds from hell through to bodhi.sattva—are endowed with the world of Buddhahood, and that the lives of Buddhas are also endowed with the nine worlds. In other words, ordinary people and Buddhas are essentially the same with no distinction between them. 9. Three thousand realms in a single moment of life is a philosophical system established by T’ien-t’ai. The “three thousand realms” indi.cates the varying aspects and phases that life assumes at each moment. At each moment, life manifests one of the Ten Worlds. Each of these worlds possesses the potential for all ten within itself, thus making one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred worlds possesses the ten factors and operates within each of the three realms of existence, thus making three thousand realms. 10.Nichiren Daishonin writes: “A bird’s egg contains nothing but liq.uid, yet by itself this develops into a beak, two eyes, and all the other parts, and the bird soars into the sky. We, too, are the eggs of ignorance, which are pitiful things, but when nurtured by the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which is like the warmth of the mother bird, we develop the beak of the thirty-two features and the feathers of the eighty characteristics [of the Buddha] and are free to soar into the sky of the true aspect of all phenomena and the reality of all things” (“Letter to Niike,” WND-1, 1030). 11.Nichiren Daishonin states: “Now in the teachings of the Lotus Sutra, people are certainly self-empowered, and yet they are not self-empowered. This is because one’s own self, or life, at the same time possesses the nature of all living beings in the Ten Worlds. Therefore this self has from the beginning been in the possession of one’s own realm of Buddhahood and of the realms of Buddhahood possessed by all other living beings. Therefore when one attains Buddhahood one does not take on some new or ‘other’ Buddha identity. “Again, in the teachings of the Lotus Sutra, people are certainly other-empowered, and yet they are not other-empowered. The Buddhas, who are considered separate from us, are actually con.tained within our own selves, or the lives of us ordinary people. Those Buddhas manifest the realms of Buddhahood of all living beings in the same manner as we do” (“The Sacred Teachings of the Buddha’s Lifetime,” WND-2, 62). Key Points The Meaning of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to commune with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist practice for fusing our lives with this Law. At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the inner darkness that pre.vents this fusion from taking place. When, through our practice of faith, we vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance and become one with the Mystic Law, its infinite power unfolds in our lives. Such is the immeasurable benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (p. 20) The Cause and Effect of Attaining Buddhahood The power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to actualize cause and effect in a single moment of life—that is, faith (cause) leading to the manifestation of our Buddhahood (effect). Considered in this light, one’s voice chanting Nam-myoho- renge-kyo is the voice of unshakable faith and seeking spirit that breaks through the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is also the courageous lion’s roar that issues forth from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of chanting. (p. 21) Chanting Like a Galloping Horse The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is not only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we should always try to chant resoundingly, with a vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop.ing horse. It can also be said that the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities of Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to return to our true, original selves and tap the innate life force that we have possessed from time without beginning. (p. 21) Bridging the Gap Between Buddhas and Ordinary People This perceived separation between the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood is demolished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of “three thousand realms in a single moment of life”—in other words, the teaching that “the nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds” (“The Selection of the Time,” WND-1, 539). Here we can see the immense importance of the Lotus Sutra principle of the “mutual possession of the Ten Worlds.” Nichiren opened the way to actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by estab.lishing the practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. This constitutes in its fullest and most complete form the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlightenment for all human beings. (p. 22) Manifesting Our Inner Power That Transcends Us The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the uni.verse. Its universality transcends our individual selves. As indicated by its description as the “mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings,” however, the Mystic Law also exists within our lives (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” WND-1, 3). It both resides within us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in our lives because it is the all-embracing Law that pervades everything in the universe. (p. 23) Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Is Your Own Life! [Mr. Toda] also often spoke of the spirit of faith we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law within us, saying: “You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho.renge-kyo is your own life!” or “Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day means firmly believing that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myoho.renge-kyo!” This is the spirit Nichiren teaches in the passage, “When you chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge.kyo is your life itself ” (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” WND-1, 3). (p. 25) On Attaining In This Lifetime [4] Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude— Refusing To Live an “Endless, Painful Austerity”  You must never think that any of the eighty thousand sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha’s lifetime or any of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions and three existences are outside yourself. Your practice of the Buddhist teachings will not relieve you of the sufferings of birth and death in the least unless you perceive the true nature of your life. If you seek enlighten.ment outside yourself, then your performing even ten thousand practices and ten thousand good deeds will be in vain. It is like the case of a poor man who spends night and day counting his neighbor’s wealth but gains not even half a coin. That is why the T’ien-t’ai school’s commentary states, “Unless one per.ceives the nature of one’s life, one cannot eradicate one’s grave offenses.”1 This passage implies that, unless one perceives the nature of one’s life, one’s prac.tice will become an endless, painful austerity. Therefore, such students of Buddhism are condemned as non-Buddhist. [T’ien-t’ai’s] Great Concentration and Insight states that, although they study Buddhism, their views are no dif.ferent from those of non-Buddhists. Whether you chant the Buddha’s name,2 recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of goodness in your life. With this conviction, you should strive in faith. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, pp. 3–4)  The character myo of myoho, or “Mystic Law,” has three meanings: to be fully endowed, to open and to revive.3 These three meanings are all implicit in chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo. In other words, the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo contains (1) the myo of perfect endowment—meaning that the single Law of Myoho-renge-kyo encompasses all phe.nomena; (2) the myo of transformation that “opens” the world of Buddhahood in the lives of beings in the nine worlds (the worlds from hell through bodhisattva); and (3) the myo of great benefit, whereby a life filled with suffering is “revived” as a life of great tranquillity and joy. Our lives themselves are entities of the Mystic Law. Therefore, they are fully endowed with all phenomena. Fundamental darkness and the enlightened Dharma nature,4 earthly desires and enlightenment, and the nine worlds and the world of Buddhahood—all of these exist within us. For precisely that reason, we can carry out a mystic and fundamental inner “revolution”—changing darkness into light; kindling the flame of enlight.enment by “burning the firewood of earthly desires” (The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings, p. 11) and thereby manifesting the world of Buddhahood in our lives of the nine worlds. The key to achieving this profound inner transformation is our hearts—our fundamental attitude or mind-set. Therefore, Nichiren Dai.shonin warns in “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime”: “If you think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). When we diligently exert ourselves in chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo based on this admonition, always remembering that a change in our own hearts or minds is crucial, the three meanings of myo will clearly manifest themselves in our lives. Needless to say, the Law contained in the prac.tice of chanting spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. But even the power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest in a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that prevents us from believing in the Mystic Law and staying focused on our own Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of chanting enables us to break through this darkness and vibrantly bring forth our Buddhahood. Battling our funda.mental darkness—this inner struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Studying Buddhism Yet Succumbing to Non-Buddhist Thinking In the passage we are studying this time, Nichiren Daishonin strongly cautions: “You must never think that any of the eighty thousand sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha’s lifetime or any of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten direc.tions and three existences are outside yourself” (WND-1, 3). The use of the word never here is deeply significant. This passage explains that the entirety of Buddhism is contained within our own lives. Nichiren concludes that “the eighty thou.sand sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha’s lifetime” and “the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten directions and three existences”5 are all phenomena inherent within us. Nichiren goes on to say that as long as we seek enlightenment outside ourselves, even our per.forming “ten thousand practices and ten thousand good deeds” (meaning all of the prac.tices expounded in Shakyamuni’s lifetime teachings) and believing in the protection of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the three existences (meaning the benevolent functions of the universe) will be in vain. Doing so is as point.less as counting a neighbor’s wealth, he states, because we personally gain nothing from doing so. Nichiren then cites a passage from a T’ien-t’ai school commentary, which states, “Unless one per.ceives the nature of one’s life, one cannot eradicate one’s grave offenses” (WND-1, 3 –4). If we fail to grasp this point, Nichiren warns, all of the practices and good deeds we might perform while seeking enlightenment outside ourselves will ultimately become “an endless, painful austerity” (WND-1, 4). What does it mean to say that unless we per.ceive the nature of our lives, we cannot eradicate our grave offenses? “Grave offenses” here can be taken to indicate fundamental darkness, which is the source of all evil. The grave offense of slan.der—denigrating the Law or the correct teaching of Buddhism—arises from fundamental darkness or ignorance. In T’ien-t’ai’s Buddhism, it is only possible to eradicate this ignorance through the practice of observing one’s mind—in other words, through wisdom. In Nichiren Buddhism, however, funda.mental darkness can be overcome by the sharp sword of faith in accord with the principle of “substituting faith for wisdom.”6 This is the essence of the practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. To recap, if we seek enlightenment outside of us, we are not pursuing the path of “observing one’s mind,” which enables us to overcome the fundamental evil of ignorance or darkness. In that case, all our efforts and good deeds to attain enlightenment will be lacking the vital ingredient; they will be every bit as futile as counting a neigh.bor’s vast riches. Moreover, because none of these efforts will help us eradicate our ignorance, they will only become “an endless, painful austerity.” This battle against ignorance is the heart of Buddhism. It is said that Shakyamuni’s enlighten.ment lay in identifying darkness or ignorance as the fundamental cause of the sufferings of birth, aging, sickness and death—as well as in expound.ing the way for overcoming this ignorance. Therefore, as long as we seek the path to enlightenment outside our own lives, whatever practices and good deeds we carry out will deviate from the true essence of Buddhism. Accordingly, Nichiren says: “Such students of Buddhism are condemned as non-Buddhist” (WND-1, 4). To Seek Enlightenment Outside Our Lives Is To Be Defeated by Fundamental Darkness An important point in this writing is that we as Nichiren Buddhists also run the risk of falling into non-Buddhist ways of thinking if we seek the Law outside of our own lives. Hence, as Nichiren Daishonin’s disciples, we must always bear in mind his admonition “You must never think that any of the [Buddha’s] teachings . . . are outside yourself” (WND-1, 3). The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a practice for revealing the “originally inherent mystic truth”7 that exists in all people and achiev.ing Buddhahood in this lifetime. It is an incomparably “wonderful practice” (OTT, 88), in the sense that it represents the means by which all living beings can gain enlightenment. If, however, we forget Nichiren’s admonition to never seek the Law outside of us, then no matter how hard we practice, we will lose sight of the cor.rect path to universal enlightenment and effectively wind up practicing a non-Buddhist teaching. That’s why Nichiren is so strict on this point. The essence of our practice is to perceive the true nature of our lives. To do this we must wage an inner struggle. If we allow ourselves to be defeated by the three obstacles and four devils,8 we cannot bring forth our enlightenment. That is  why battling the darkness or ignorance within us is an unavoidable part of the process of becoming a Buddha. In other words, whether we continu.ously battle our innate ignorance is the single most important determinant in whether we attain Buddhahood. As such, it is something we must never forget. By engaging in this struggle, we can reveal the Buddha wisdom within our lives and thereby confront and overcome our ignorance. But if we fail to undertake this struggle, ignorance will shroud and conceal our Buddha nature. Igno.rance deepens and exacerbates the five delusive inclinations of greed, anger, foolishness, arro.gance and doubt within us. That is what happens if we succumb to the erroneous view that the Law is outside ourselves. Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime Naturally, the Gohonzon—the object of devotion in Nichiren Buddhism—in itself is great beyond measure. A passage from Nichikan’s Six-Volume Writings9 that states: “Even someone who has not yet aroused true faith will still receive immense benefit through connecting with the correct object [of devotion, namely, the Gohonzon]” (Rokkansho, p. 81). The true lineage of faith we inherit in the Soka Gakkai is what opens up this infinite and bound.less power of the Gohonzon. Faith as practiced by the Soka Gakkai entails an active struggle to man.ifest the Mystic Law in our lives; it also produces clear actual proof of benefit. When we advance together with the Soka Gakkai, we naturally come to internalize the correct practice of faith as taught by Nichiren Daishonin. Therefore, those who sincerely chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo to the Gohonzon and practice and participate in activities with the Soka Gakkai cannot fail to become Buddhas. The purpose of faith is to freely realize our full potential and shine in our own unique way. That’s why it’s important to keep advancing and challenging ourselves, to have the spirit “I will exert myself in my practice! I will deepen my faith! I will do my best as a mem.ber of the Soka Gakkai.” This is the certain path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. With this understanding, let’s concretely and strictly apply to our daily practice Nichiren’s admonition “If you think the Law is outside your.self, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). To seek the Mystic Law somewhere outside of us essentially amounts to evading responsibility for our own lives. Practicing Nichiren Buddhism means not being swayed this way and that; it means con.structing a self that is solid and resolute like towering Mount Fuji. But if we neglect this task and focus our energies somewhere else, before we’re even aware of it, we can end up veering onto the path of externally seeking the Law. For example, if we chant to the Gohonzon but always blame other people or our environment for our circumstances, we are avoiding the chal.lenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment out.side of us. By changing ourselves on a more profound level, we can begin to improve our situ.ation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that change. It is also important that we don’t fall into the trap of practicing “dependent faith,” where we pin our hopes on having our prayers answered through the divine or transcendent powers of gods or Buddhas. This is a typical example of viewing the Law as outside oneself. The provi.sional Buddhas of the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings10 readily lend themselves to this kind of faith, the essence of which is escapism. Even when they’re obviously suffering, people of dependent faith avoid looking at their prob.lems. They don’t have the courage or make any actual effort to challenge their situation. In such cases, quite frankly, faith is simply something peo.ple hide behind as they avoid dealing with reality. Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly engage the gears of our human revolution. To use the analogy of mountain climbing, if we just walk around the base of the mountain and never actually attempt to ascend its slopes, we’ll never reach the summit, no matter how much time passes. If we avoid challenging our own issues, we can never strengthen and develop ourselves, and we won’t be able to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. In addition, it is important that we try to rid our lives of ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe.lief as well as grumbling and complaining. The erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the Mys.tic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core an inability to believe that all people—ourselves and others—possess the Buddha nature. And this disbelief stems from fundamental darkness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to skeptically regard the Buddha nature as “a nice ideal but one that doesn’t really change reality” will manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking in conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he says, “You must summon up deep faith” (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inherent Buddha nature the basis of our lives—or as Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime— we must continue striving to deepen our faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as confident and concrete prayer. Because our practice of faith is aimed at attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is essen.tial that we have a solidly focused attitude when chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like trying to shoot an arrow: without a clear target, we won’t draw the bow with any real force or determina.tion. In the same way, when we replace vague yearnings with concrete determinations and con.fident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what we hope to achieve. Grumbling and complaining are the principal gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe.lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual, it will act as a constant brake on our growth and cause us to forget about advancing and improv.ing ourselves. We will then effectively close off our own potential, falling into the path of seeking the Law outside of us. While it might be a real chal.lenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these tendencies and use them as a springboard for positive growth and development. Let’s also strictly guard against slandering our fellow members. Slandering and harboring resent.ment and jealousy toward others results in denying their Buddha nature. The inability to believe in others’ Buddha nature—just like not believing in our own—causes us to stray off course and seek the Law externally. Our Buddha nature is what fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for  ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people have the potential for Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra, not only won’t we accomplish our desire to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up committing slander of the Law.11 Also, unless we practice together united in the spirit of “many in body, one in mind,” the great desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.12 Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves and others is the true means for attaining Bud.dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the potential to become a Buddha. The Spirit of the First Three Presidents Pulses in the Soka Gakkai A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of the Law in each person’s life is one that treasures the individual. It calls out to each person, encour.ages his or her individual human revolution and seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the appearance of one person after another embracing faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily emerging from the earth to propagate the Law, and the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.13 This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first three presidents—Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei Toda and myself—have steadfastly followed. That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phe.nomenal development and why our kosen-rufu movement has spread throughout the entire world. In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the Law as existing outside one’s own life tend to be authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and repress people. They are prone to emphasizing rit.uals or clerical authority, while their followers passively seek to assuage their anxieties through dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak.ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings’ greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have come to function almost exclusively as purveyors of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, devolving into what is known as “funeral Bud.dhism.” They offer no philosophy that empowers people or enables them to live better lives. The Soka Gakkai’s founder, President Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a “teaching for transforming one’s life.” To believe that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo exists within us is to have the confidence that we will definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working for kosen-rufu through sharing Nichiren Bud.dhism based on the conviction that it holds the key to happiness for both ourselves and others. This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the first three presidents’ spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this most difficult of challenges—that of awakening people to the Law within. President Toda used to say, “You should resolve, ‘I am Myoho-renge-kyo!’” The Mystic Law is the “highly effective medicine” (The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 269) that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also the great treasure storehouse that brings good fortune and happiness to all. The important thing is to live out our lives based on and completely in sync with the Law; it is to imbue and solidify our lives with the Mystic Law. Our daily realities are filled with an endless succession of problems. But with the firm belief that our lives are Myoho-renge-kyo, we should strive to boldly challenge everything with the unwavering conviction that we can overcome all hardships and become happy without fail. When we maintain deep faith based on the foundation that “I am Myoho-renge-kyo,” we can take on any problem with courage. The key to victory in life lies in whether we can bring forth courage. Not a shrinking timidity but a challenging courage— this is what we need to have! Irrespective of the obstacles we may encounter in the course of our practice, we must not retreat a single step. We must not be alarmed or startled by them. The power of the Mystic Law (Myoho.renge-kyo) can triumph over anything. To become deeply confident of this is most important. Fearing hardships and bemoaning and resent.ing our environment are to believe that the Law is outside our own lives. So is losing confidence in our ability to overcome our circumstances and turning to others in the hope that they will save us, or blaming others for our problems, or giving in to hopelessness and resignation. When difficulties beset us, no matter how try.ing they may be, we must clearly see them for the obstacles or devilish functions they are and battle against them without retreating. This is the way of life of those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law. Nichiren Daishonin says, “[My] disciples cannot accomplish anything if they are cowardly” (“The Teaching, Practice, and Proof,” WND-1, 481). In accord with these words, let’s cast aside cowardice and make courage our foremost attribute. People of courageous faith can break through the dark clouds of fear, ignorance and delusion to bring the sun of the Mystic Law to shine and beautiful flowers of Myoho-renge—the lotus of the Mystic Law—to bloom in their lives. President Toda gave the following guidance to young women’s division members in the pioneer.ing days of our movement: “You should take pride in possessing the same life as the Buddha of the Latter Day. Win in life with a noble spirit. You must absolutely never depreciate yourselves.” Nichiren Buddhism starts from the realization that the supreme life-condition of Buddhahood exists in each of us. It is a teaching that makes it possible for us to achieve the profoundest inner transformation—a transformation of our funda.mental attitude or mind-set. That’s why Nichiren emphasizes the importance of our minds, of what’s in our hearts. He writes: “Whether you chant the Buddha’s name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of goodness in your life. With this convic.tion you should strive in faith” (WND-1, 4). All our efforts in faith—including our practice of reciting the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo each morning and evening, as well as all of our various Soka Gakkai activities—are virtuous acts that “implant benefits and roots of goodness” in our lives. Those who advance with this deep aware.ness will be true victors who travel the direct path to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Always upholding the great philosophy embodied in Nichiren’s words “It is the heart that is important” (WND-1, 1000), let us lead magnif.icent, victorious lives! 1. Miao-lo, The Annotations on “Great Concentration and Insight.” 2. As used here,“the Buddha’s name” denotes Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. 3. Three meanings of myo: In “The Daimoku of the Lotus Sutra,” Nichiren Daishonin writes: “Myo means to be fully endowed, which in turn has the meaning of ‘perfect and full’” (WND-1, 146); “The character myo means to open” (WND-1, 145); and “Myo means to revive, that is, to return to life” (WND-1, 149). 4. The unchanging nature inherent in all things and phenomena. 5. The ten directions refers to the entire universe, all physical space. Specifically, the ten directions are the eight directions of the com.pass—north, south, east, west, northwest, northeast, southeast and southwest—plus up and down. Buddhist scriptures refer to the existence of Buddha lands in all directions throughout the uni.verse, each with its own Buddha. The expression the Buddhas of the ten directions in the sutras indicates these Buddhas. The phrase ten directions often appears with the phrase three existences, meaning past, present and future existences. “The Buddhas of the ten direc.tions and three existences” thus means all Buddhas throughout space and time. 6. Substituting faith for wisdom: The principle that faith is the true cause for gaining supreme wisdom, and faith alone leads to enlightenment. 7. Originally inherent mystic truth: The fundamental Law, Mystic Law or Buddha nature with which all life is originally endowed. 8. Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. 9. Nichikan was the twenty-sixth chief priest of Taiseki-ji, the head temple of the Nikko school (also known as the Fuji school). He is revered as the restorer of Nichiren’s teachings because he worked to clarify their true meaning. During the four centuries after Nichiren Daishonin’s death, a number of errors and misconceptions had arisen as his followers split into many schools. Nichikan worked tirelessly to clarify the true meaning of Nichiren’s teachings. He completed exegeses on Nichiren’s five major writings and other works, and authored The Six-Volume Writings, which distinguishes the correct interpretations of Nichiren’s teachings from misleading ones. 10. The provisional teachings that preceded the Lotus Sutra do not teach that the world of Buddhahood exists in all people, and instead describe Buddhas as idealized and superior beings. The Pure Land (Nembutsu) teachings, for example, explain that instead of relying on one’s own efforts, one should exclusively depend on salvation through such a Buddha—namely, Amida. 11. In “The Fourteen Slanders,” Nichiren writes: “There is a difference if one chants the daimoku while acting against the intent of this sutra . . . Always remember that believers in the Lotus Sutra should absolutely be the last to abuse one another. All those who keep faith in the Lotus Sutra are most certainly Buddhas, and one who slan.ders a Buddha commits a grave offense” (WND-1, 756). 12. In “The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life,” Nichiren writes: “All disciples and lay supporters of Nichiren should chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but one in mind, transcending all differences among themselves to become as insep.arable as fish and the water in which they swim. This spiritual bond is the basis for the universal transmission of the ultimate Law of life and death. Herein lies the true goal of Nichiren’s propaga.tion. When you are so united, even the great desire for widespread propagation can be fulfilled” (WND-1, 217). 13. In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren writes: “At first only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three, and a hundred followed, chanting and teaching others. Prop.agation will unfold this way in the future as well. Does this not signify ‘emerging from the earth’?” (WND-1, 385). Key Points: The Essence of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo The Law contained in the practice of chanting spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. But even the power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest in a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that prevents us from believing in the Mystic Law and staying focused on our own Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of chanting enables us to break through this darkness and vibrantly bring forth our Buddhahood. Bat.tling our fundamental darkness—this inner struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. (p. 29) The Heart of Buddhism If we seek enlightenment outside of us, we are not pursuing the path of “observing one’s mind,” which enables us to overcome the fundamental evil of ignorance or darkness. In that case, all our efforts and good deeds to attain enlightenment will be lacking the vital ingredient; they will be every bit as futile as counting a neighbor’s vast riches. Moreover, because none of these efforts will help us eradicate our ignorance, they will only become “an endless, painful austerity.” This battle against ignorance is the heart of Buddhism. (p. 30) The Driving Force for Our Transformation If we chant to the Gohonzon but always blame other people or our environment for our circum.stances, we are avoiding the challenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment outside of us. By chang.ing ourselves on a more profound level that we can begin to improve our situation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that change. (p. 31) Confident and Concrete Prayer The erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the Mystic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core an inability to believe that all people—our.selves and others—possess the Buddha nature. And this disbelief stems from fundamental dark.ness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to skeptically regard the Buddha nature as “a nice ideal but one that doesn’t really change reality” will manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking in conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he says, “You must summon up deep faith” (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inher.ent Buddha nature the basis of our lives—or as Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime—we must continue striving to deepen our faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43) Overcoming Grumbling and Complaining Grumbling and complaining are the principal gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe.lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual, it will act as a constant brake on our growth and cause us to forget about advancing and improving ourselves. We will then effectively close off our own potential, falling into the path of seeking the Law outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these tendencies and use them as a springboard for pos.itive growth and development. (p. 32) On Attaining In This Lifetime [5] Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a “Brave and Vigorous” Spirit— Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge  The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas’ emancipation in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands, pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of our minds. It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar.nished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)  Those whose hearts shine with a commit.ment to truth and justice never lose hope, even amid the greatest hardship or difficulty. Rather, they serve as a bright beacon illuminating the darkness of people’s suffering, imparting inspiration, assurance and courage. When we change, the world changes. The key to all change is in our inner transforma.tion—a change in our hearts and minds. This is human revolution. We all have the power to change. When we realize this truth of life, we can bring forth that power anywhere, anytime and in any situation. Nichiren Buddhism, based on the transfor.mative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has made this great path of inner change available to all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho.renge-kyo as its core practice. This time, I’ll discuss the passage in which Nichiren Daishonin outlines the basic attitude and approach to our fundamental practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Changing Ourselves and Changing the Land As I have already touched on at length, the entirety of Buddhism exists within our own lives. And the key to attaining Buddhahood—the ultimate transformation of our life-state—also lies in a change in our hearts, or minds. To convey this point, Nichiren Daishonin here summarizes a point from the Vimalakirti Sutra:1 “When one seeks the Buddhas’ emanci.pation in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana”2 (WND-1, 4). “Ordinary beings are the entities of enlight.enment” means that the wisdom for attaining Buddhahood (enlightenment) manifests in the lives of ordinary people steeped in earthly desires. Similarly, “the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana” means that the Buddha life-state of true peace and tranquillity (nirvana) manifests in the lives of ordinary people tor.mented by the sufferings of birth and death. Here, Nichiren explains that Buddhas and ordinary people are not separated by an insur.mountable divide; that the only thing setting them apart is the difference in the “minds of ordinary beings.” Nichiren also cites the passage from the Vimalakirti Sutra that explains the difference between pure and impure lands. This passage— which Nichiren summarizes as “If the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land”3—clarifies that there are not two separate lands; the only difference between pure and impure lands is “the good or evil of our minds.” The view shown here is one in which the pure land does not exist in some otherworldly realm but in the real world, and is achieved by people changing themselves inside. This is a dynamic and practical view of the pure land, based on the idea of “to purify Buddha lands” expounded in the Lotus Sutra (The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 117). The Vimalakirti Sutra passage cited by Nichi.ren is from the “Inquiring about the Illness,” or fifth, chapter. This chapter describes the exchange between Vimalakirti, an outstanding Buddhist lay believer and practitioner of the bodhisattva way who has fallen ill, and Manju.shri, one of Shakyamuni’s leading disciples, who is visiting him. When asked the cause of his illness, Vimalakirti replies, “Because all living beings are sick, therefore I am sick.”4 This is a well-known passage that succinctly reveals the fundamental bodhisattva spirit of taking on others’ sufferings as one’s own. Vimalakirti goes on to say that bodhisattvas choose to be born among living beings afflicted by delusion and to share in the sufferings of birth and death in order to instruct and guide those living beings to enlightenment. More.over, bodhisattvas are never overwhelmed or swayed by suffering, because they have estab.lished a pure state of enlightenment within.5 Thus, the passages from the Vimalakirti Sutra cited by Nichiren clarify the meaning of Buddhahood and the pure land from the stand.point of a bodhisattva practitioner fighting amid the realities of daily life. Nichiren, there.fore, states in conclusion, “When deluded, one is called an ordinary being, but when enlight.ened, one is called a Buddha” (WND-1, 4). In other words, the difference between ordinary people and Buddhas is nothing more than the difference between delusion and enlightenment in ordinary people’s minds. How, then, can we transform delusion into enlightenment? In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains that when people’s hearts change, the land or their external environment can also change. At its foundation is a transformation from delu.sion to enlightenment. As discussed earlier, what makes this trans.formation possible is the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood with which we are originally endowed. Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe this fundamental potential for change, saying, “This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished” (WND-1, 4). In this way, he conveys that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the means for defeating our inner darkness—serves to “polish” our lives. All living beings are inherently entities of the Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud.dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin.drance, whenever and in whatever form it is needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a benighted state, we are like a “tarnished mirror” that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the tarnished mirror of our lives. The Path for Polishing Our Lives: (1) Brave Challenge Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chant.ing as a practice for polishing our lives: “A mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate dark.ness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror, reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo” (WND-1, 4). The mirror simile here is truly ingenious. The mirror being endowed with the property of reflection corresponds to our lives being endowed with the mystic truth. But if a mirror is not polished, it will naturally become clouded. Since mirrors in Nichiren’s day were typically made of bronze, they would readily tarnish. A tarnished mirror could not fulfill its original function, so it had to be polished regularly. Similarly, if our lives are neglected and left uncultivated, they will be shrouded in ignorance. The act of polishing is indispensable for restoring the mirror’s innate property. More.over, just polishing a mirror once is not enough. We have to keep polishing it if we wish it to retain its reflective property. As this metaphor aptly attests, our practice of chanting SGI President Ikeda welcomes U.N. Under-Secretary-General Anwarul K. Chowdhury at the Makiguchi Memorial Hall in Tokyo, August 30, 2006. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to polish our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our enlightened Dharma nature. This practice of polishing our lives may be seen as having two aspects. One is to “arouse deep faith,” as Nichiren exhorts (WND-1, 4). This could also be articulated as summoning the fighting spirit to battle our inner darkness. The other aspect is to continue making stead.fast efforts, in accord with Nichiren’s admonition that we should “diligently polish our mirror day and night” (see WND-1, 4). These two points echo the two aspects of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo identified by Nichikan, a seventeenth-century restorer of Nichiren Buddhism, based on the phrase in the “Expedient Means” chapter of the Lotus Sutra, “exert oneself bravely and vigorously” (see LSOC, 56; Jpn yumyo shojin). Nichikan explains that “bravely and vigorously” (yumyo) means courageously bringing forth the power of faith, or confidence, in chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo, while “exert oneself” (shojin) means engaging sincerely and consistently in the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.6 In chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the first important thing is having the challeng.ing spirit to act with courage. This could be described as arousing deep faith from the innermost reaches of our lives in accord with Nichiren’s words, firmly believing that we can summon forth the mystic truth within us, manifest our inherent Buddhahood and attain enlightenment in this lifetime without fail. It also means directly taking on the three obstacles and four devils that seek to obstruct us from chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. We need to have a fearless, tireless and unremit.ting challenging spirit to confront and overcome the diverse array of obstacles that rise up to assail us. For it is precisely by chal.lenging, battling and defeating ignorance that we can polish our lives. The Path for Polishing Our Lives: (2) Continuing Next, continuing is vital. It is absolutely essential for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nichiren Daishonin says: “To accept is easy; to continue is difficult. But Buddhahood lies in continuing faith” (“The Difficulty of Sustaining Faith,” WND-1, 471). In “On Attaining Buddha-hood in This Lifetime,” we see the paramount importance of continuing from Nichiren’s repeated emphasis on the need to practice “day and night” and “diligently” (WND-1, 4). Main.taining an unflagging practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a crucial requirement for attaining Buddhahood. Nichiren writes: “Suffer what there is to suf.fer, enjoy what there is to enjoy. Regard both suffering and joy as facts of life, and continue chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, no matter what happens. How could this be anything other than the boundless joy of the Law?” (“Happiness in This World,” WND-1, 681). We must continue chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo during times of both suffering and joy. The emphasis here is on the word continue, and it is key that we do so throughout “both suffering and joy.” When con.fronted with suffering, we must not retreat. We should “suffer what there is to suffer.” This is nei.ther resignation nor escapism. We need to fix our gaze unflinchingly on reality and bravely challenge it based on chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. Nichiren is explaining that this is the correct attitude for practitioners of the Mystic Law. Faith in Nichiren Buddhism is constantly directed toward transforming reality. Of course, such a state of life is not gained overnight. But if we steadfastly and diligently continue making efforts to polish ourselves day in and day out, month after month, year after year, we will naturally and surely come to attain it, mirroring the words of the sutra passage “This cluster of unsurpassed jewels / has come to us unsought” (LSOC, 124).7 Next, “enjoy what there is to enjoy” (WND-1, 681), can be taken to mean that when we’re expe.riencing joy, we should remember to have gratitude and make even greater efforts to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, aiming toward the ulti.mate goal of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Deepening our seeking spirit in faith is much more difficult in good times than in bad, because in good times it is easy to grow lax and self-satisfied. Rather than being someone who is strong in adversity but weak when things are going well, we should seek to construct the kind of invincible faith that allows us to “regard both suffering and joy as facts of life” (WND-1, 681). Such strong faith is forged through our prac.tice as Soka Gakkai members striving to achieve the lofty goal of kosen-rufu and our own enlight.enment in this existence. Above all, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the process by which we “diligently polish our mirror day and night” (see WND-1, 4)—strengthens our lives in the same way that a magnificent sword is forged and tempered. The crux here lies in chanting with the spirit to challenge in times of suffering, and chanting with appreciation in times of joy. “Continuing” is another way of saying “not regressing.” Throughout the pages of Nichiren’s writings, we can see his emphasis on never regressing or backsliding in faith. To cite but a few passages, Nichiren writes: “One . . . who chants the daimoku, is the Thus Come One’s emissary. Also, one who perseveres through great persecutions and embraces the sutra from beginning to end is the Thus Come One’s emis.sary” (“The Farther the Source, the Longer the Stream,” WND-1, 942); “Strengthen your faith day by day and month after month. Should you slacken in your resolve even a bit, devils will take advantage” (“On Persecution Befalling the Sage,” WND-1, 997); and “Carry through with your faith in the Lotus Sutra. You cannot strike fire from flint if you stop halfway” (“Earthly Desires Are Enlightenment,” WND-1, 319). Without a battle to conquer ignorance or darkness, we cannot manifest the essential nature of phenomena, or Dharma nature. And unless we continue to wage this battle through exerting ourselves in faith, we cannot construct an unshakable state of life that is one with the Dharma nature (namely, the life-state of Bud.dhahood). This is because if we “slacken in our resolve even a bit” (see WND-1, 997), as Nichi.ren writes, we will become vulnerable to life’s negative influences. Also, when we exert ourselves in faith, the three obstacles and four devils inevitably arise. It is by defeating them that we can establish the life-state of Buddhahood. When we polish our lives on the most fundamental level through the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo, we can deepen, strengthen and broaden ourselves spiritually without limit. “Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Is a Diligent Practice” Nichiren Daishonin strove to share the supreme inner state of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime with all his followers—and indeed all humankind. The true greatness of the practice of chant.ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it enables each person to actually manifest the same life-state as the Buddha and lead an existence of unsurpassed depth and meaning. This is clearly indicated in the following well-known passage from The Record of the Orally Transmit.ted Teachings : “If in a single moment of life we exhaust the pains and trials of millions of kalpas, then instant after instant there will arise in us the three Buddha bodies8 with which we are eternally endowed. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is just such a ‘diligent’ practice” (p. 214). Ever since our second Soka Gakkai presi.dent, Josei Toda, explained this passage to me in my youth, I have made it the personal motto by which I have lived my life. In all my struggles, I have borne these words ever in mind. The “Emerging from the Earth” chapter of the Lotus Sutra describes countless bodhisattvas appearing from out of the ground—the emergence of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth. It explains that they have been dwelling in the empty space underneath the saha world and seeking the Buddha way with constant diligence (see LSOC, 259). The above quote from The Record of the Orally Transmit.ted Teachings clarifies from the standpoint of Nichiren Buddhism the nature of their dili.gence or tireless exertion. The essence of Nichiren Buddhism is that those who exert themselves assiduously to seek the Buddha way automatically manifest the life-state of the Buddha eternally endowed with the three bodies—in other words, they bring forth their inherent Buddhahood. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as if to concentrate in a single moment the arduous exertions of incalculable eons—“exhausting the pains and trials of millions of kalpas” (see OTT, 214)—then the life-state of the Buddha eternal.ly endowed with the three bodies (namely, our Buddhahood) appears within us instant after instant. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice. Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering single-mindedly and consistently in this practice will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent Buddhahood—the Buddha eternally endowed with the three bodies—wells forth in the form of inexhaustible courage, perseverance, joy, wisdom and compassion. Praying for Brave and Vigorous Youth To Appear Exerting oneself means doing so bravely and vigorously. Without courage and vigor, there is no true exertion. The first Soka Gakkai presi.dent, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, also led a life of brave and vigorous endeavor. He once said to young people: “Exert yourselves bravely and vigorously! Buddhism means taking action; it means constantly striving. Even at my age, that’s what I’m doing.” President Toda also remarked to youth, “Youth who wish for the happiness of humanity should first themselves seek the essence of this lofty philosophy of human revolution. They should exert themselves bravely and vigorously to fight and triumph over all manifestations of the three powerful enemies and the three obstacles and four devils.” My sentiments are exactly the same. I chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ardently for brave and vigorous disciples, brave and vigorous youth, to appear throughout the world. I am wholeheart.edly chanting for this every day. Exerting oneself bravely and vigorously is truly the hallmark of the Soka Gakkai’s mentor-disciple spirit. The practice of chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo is the driving force for progress, the driving force for victory. Every challenge should begin with chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo. No one is a match for those who steadfastly chant. Diligently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo morning and evening, let us thoroughly polish ourselves inside and construct lives in which we win victory after victory. On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 1. Vimalakirti Sutra: A Mahayana sutra about Vimalakirti, a wealthy and prominent citizen of the city of Vaishali at the time of Shakyamuni. In the sutra, Vimalakirti represents the ideal Mahayana lay believer. The Sanskrit original of this sutra is not extant, but there are three Chinese translations, including one by Kumarajiva, which is the most popular version and the work usually referred to when this title is mentioned. 2. Here, Nichiren Daishonin summarizes passages from the Vimalakirti Sutra and the Great Teacher T’ien-t’ai’s reference to it. “Inquiring About the Illness,” the fifth chapter of the sutra, contains the following exchange: “‘And how is the emancipation of the Buddhas to be sought?’ asked Manjushri. ‘It may be sought in the minds . . . of all living beings,’ replied Vimalakirti.” The Vimalakirti Sutra, trans. by Burton Watson from the Chinese version by Kumarajiva (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997), p. 66. In his Great Concentration and Insight, T’ien-t’ai writes: “According to the Vimalakirti Sutra, the emancipation of the Thus Come One should be sought in the minds of living beings. Because living beings are entities of enlightenment, it is not something to be obtained. Because [the birth and death of] living beings are nirvana, [birth and death] are not extinguished. Emancipation already exists in the heart of one and the hearts of all, as do all phenomena.” 3. This summary is based on the passage, “When the mind is pure, the Buddha land will be pure.” The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 29. 4. Vimalakirti says: “Because all living beings are sick, therefore I am sick. If all living beings are relieved of sickness, then my sickness will be mended. Why? Because the bodhisattva for the sake of living beings enters the realm of birth and death, and because he is in the realm of birth and death he suffers illness. If living beings can gain release from illness, then the bodhisattva will no longer be ill.” The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 65. 5. The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 65ff. 6. In “Interpreting the Text Based upon Its Essential Meaning,” a treatise of The Six-Volume Writings, Nichikan writes: “You should understand that ‘to exert oneself bravely and vigorously’ (see LSOC, 56; Jpn yumyo sho.jin) refers to faith and to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It therefore means the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo of the essential teaching. ‘Bravely and vigorously’ (yumyo) refers to faith. A commentary [on the Lotus Sutra] therefore states: ‘Yu (bravely) means to act with courage; myo (vigorously) means to expend all one’s wisdom.’ Hence, ‘bravely and vigorously’ describes courageously bringing forth the power of faith to the fullest extent. Shojin (to exert oneself) indicates the practice of chanting daimoku. A commentary therefore states: ‘Sho (pure) means unadulterated; jin (effort) means ceaseless advance.’” 7. These words are an exclamation of joy when Shakyamuni’s voice-hearer disciples learn that they can in fact attain Buddhahood, which had previously been denied to them. 8. The three bodies of the Buddha refer to the Dharma body, the reward body and the manifested body. The Dharma body is the fundamental truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the com.passionate actions the Buddha carries out to lead people to happiness. SGI President Ikeda’s Lecture Series The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life A series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on Nichiren Daishonin’s writing “The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life.” Nichiren states: “Shakyamuni Buddha who attained enlightenment countless kalpas ago, the Lotus Sutra that leads all people to Buddhahood, and we ordinary human beings are in no way di.erent or separate from one another. To chant Myoho-renge-kyo with this realization is to inherit the ultimate Law of life and death.” SKU #290991 • $5.95 Learning From the Writings: The Hope-ﬁlled Teachings of Nichiren Daishonin A series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on 15 writings from Nichiren Daishonin, including “Winter Always Turns to Spring,” “The Dragon Gate,” “The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra” and “Lessening One’s Karmic Retribution.” President Ikeda states in the introduction to this lecture series: “The writings of Nichiren Daishonin fully elucidate this philosophy of hope as well as its practice and proof. They are a source of illumination that endlessly encourages and inspires . . . Let us strive to read with our lives—that is, to put into practice—even a line or two of Nichiren’s writings, which overﬂow with his spirit.” SKU #290992 • $8.95 Available at your local SGI-USA bookstore or from: (800) 626-1313 or bookstore.sgi-usa.org Key Points When We Change, the World Changes When we change, the world changes. The key to all change is in our inner transformation—a change in our hearts and minds. This is human revolution. We all have the power to change. When we realize this truth of life, we can bring forth that power anywhere, anytime and in any situation. Nichiren Buddhism, based on the transformative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has made this great path of inner change available to all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho.renge-kyo as its core practice. (p. 38) Changing the Environment Through Changing People’s Hearts Nichiren explains that when people’s hearts change, the land or their external environment can also change. At its foundation is a transforma.tion from delusion to enlightenment. What makes this transformation possible is the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiri.tual level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood with which we are originally endowed. (p. 39) Polishing Our Lives Through Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo All living beings are inherently entities of the Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud.dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin.drance, whenever and in whatever form it is needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a benighted state, we are like a “tarnished mirror” that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the tarnished mirror of our lives. (p. 39) Arousing Deep Faith and Making Continual Efforts The act of polishing is indispensable for restoring the mirror’s innate property. Moreover, just polish.ing a mirror once is not enough. We have to keep polishing it if we wish it to retain its reflective prop.erty. As this metaphor aptly attests, our practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to polish our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our enlightened Dharma nature. This practice of pol.ishing our lives may be seen as having two aspects. One is to “arouse deep faith,” as Nichiren exhorts (WND-1, 4). This could also be articulated as sum.moning the fighting spirit to battle our inner darkness. The other aspect is to continue making steadfast efforts, in accord with Nichiren’s admoni.tion that we should “diligently polish our mirror day and night” (see WND-1, 4). (p. 40) Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Is a Diligent Practice Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice. Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering single-mindedly and consistently in this practice will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent Buddha.hood—the Buddha eternally endowed with the three bodies—wells forth in the form of inex.haustible courage, perseverance, joy, wisdom and compassion. (p. 43) On Attaining In This Lifetime  [6] The Mystic Nature of Our Lives— “Become the Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You”  What then does myo signify? It is simply the mysterious nature of our life from moment to moment, which the mind cannot comprehend or words express. When we look into our own mind at any moment, we perceive neither color nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for many differing thoughts continually occur. The mind cannot be considered either to exist or not to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcends both the words and concepts of existence and nonexistence. It is neither exis.tence nor nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both. It is the mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality. Myo is the name given to the mystic nature of life, and ho, to its manifestations [the manifestations of the mind of myo]. Renge, which means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the wonder of this Law. If we understand that our life at this moment is myo, then we will also understand that our life at other moments is the Mystic Law. This realization is the mystic kyo, or sutra. The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life, which manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4) “It is the heart that is important” (“The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra,” WND-1, 1000), writes Nichiren Daishonin. Our hearts, our minds, are truly wondrous and unfathomable. We can expand and deepen the inner realm of our spirit infinitely and boundlessly. Like the elation of soaring freely through the vast blue heavens, the heart can feel immense and untrammeled joy. Like the clear, bright sunshine illuminating all things, the heart can embrace with warmth and compassion those who are suf.fering. And like a lion of justice, the heart can also at times tremble with righteous anger and defeat evil. Indeed, our hearts or minds are constantly changing, like scenes in a drama or like an unfold.ing panorama. And nothing is more wondrous than the heart’s ability to manifest the world of Buddhahood. Even people weighed down by delusion and suffering can bring forth in the depths of their lives the state of Buddhahood that is one with the universe. This momentous drama of transformation is the greatest of all wonders. Buddhism finds supreme nobility and the potential for great change in all human beings. In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren, therefore, concludes that when we thoroughly polish our lives through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, it is possible for us to tap the life-state of Buddhahood no matter how steeped in delusion we may be, and to transform even the most impure and evil land into a pure land. Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the “mystic truth that is originally inherent in all living beings” (WND-1, 3). Accordingly, through the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can reveal our inner Buddhahood—polishing “the tarnished mirror of a mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life” into “a clear mirror reflecting the essential nature of phenom.ena and the true aspect of reality” (see WND-1, 4). In other words, by manifesting the mystic truth that resides within us, we can tap our infinite inner potential. Buddhahood is the state of life that is one with Myoho-renge-kyo, the originally inherent mystic truth. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is also the name of this ultimate state of life. The passage I will discuss this time explains the relation between Myoho-renge-kyo and the mind of living beings in terms of the elements of myo, ho, renge and kyo. This explanation may be seen as a description of how our lives become one with Myoho-renge-kyo and manifest the state of Buddhahood. Let us consider the pro.found meaning of this passage. The Mind Is the Mystic Entity of the Middle Way That Is the Ultimate Reality Nichiren Daishonin says that myo of Myoho.renge-kyo signifies the marvelous nature of our lives from moment to moment. And he uses the concepts of existence and nonexistence to describe this wondrous and unfathomable nature. Our minds are in a state of constant flux, moving with the ebb and flow of countless thoughts and emotions. Nichiren notes: “When we look into our own mind at any moment, we perceive neither color nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for many differing thoughts continually occur. The mind cannot be considered either to exist or not to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that tran.scends both the words and concepts of existence and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both” (WND-1, 4). Nichiren describes this unfathomable nature of the mind as the “mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality” (WND.1, 4). The Middle Way does not simply mean the middle course between two extremes; it refers to a more lofty perspective that is swayed by neither extreme but also embraces them both. Shakyamuni set forth a sound philosophy and practice transcending the two then-pre.vailing extremes of hedonism and asceticism, and he called this the Middle Way. In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nich.iren says that the ultimate truth, which transcends the two extremes of existence and nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of truth, he calls it the “ultimate reality.” Transcending existence and nonexistence can be taken to mean transcending impermanent phenomena that alternate ceaselessly between existence and nonexistence. Further, exhibiting the qualities of both existence and nonexistence while transcending both does not refer to a tran.scendent or absolute being divorced from impermanent phenomena, but indicates the truly eternal that encompasses and resides within impermanent phenomena. Although Nichiren explains the mysterious nature of life or mind in terms of the concepts of existence and nonexistence in this writing, what he says here is comparable to Nagarjuna’s concept of nonsubstantiality,1 and to T’ien.t’ai’s concepts of the unification of the three truths2 and the threefold contemplation in a single mind.3 Essentially, “the mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality” of which Nichiren speaks refers to our lives or minds that are one with the ultimate truth—a concept expressed variously as nonsubstantial.ity, the unification of the three truths, or threefold contemplation in a single mind. Renge Refers to the Principle of the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect Nichiren Daishonin next states that ho, meaning Law or phenomena, is the name given to the manifestations of the mystic nature of our lives or minds—a term that can also be expressed as the wondrous mind or the “mind of myo.” The mind of myo is itself the Mystic Law. Abstract words and theories alone—be they the concepts of nonsubstantiality or the unification of the three truths—cannot be called the Mystic Law. For only when the Mystic Law is expressed as the highest human wisdom based on the Middle Way can it spread as a guide and compass, and as a teaching or Law (ho) for people to follow. In addition, Nichiren says: “Renge, which means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the won.der of this Law” (WND-1, 4). The Mystic Law is not visible to the human eye. Therefore, the Bud.dha uses a concrete symbol in order to help people understand the Law’s wondrous and mys.tic nature. This is renge, meaning “lotus flower.” Why does he employ the lotus flower? Usually plants flower first and then bear fruit—a relation.ship that is used to illustrate linear or sequential causality, with the flowers representing the cause and the fruit the effect. In Buddhism, this is referred to as the nonsimultaneity of cause and effect. By contrast, the lotus flower puts forth its petals and its receptacle (which contains its fruit) simultaneously—in other words, its fruit is pro.duced at the same time its petals open. The lotus thus symbolizes the principle of the simultaneity of cause and effect. The provisional teachings other than the Lotus Sutra do not teach that Buddhahood is inherent within the lives of ordinary people, which is regarded as the cause for attaining enlightenment. Rather, they teach that one can only gain the state of Buddhahood after undergoing countless eons of Buddhist practice. Here, cause and effect are non-simultaneous. The teachings of the Lotus Sutra, however, clarify that all people are originally endowed with the state of Buddhahood and can reveal it instantaneously. In other words, the deluded mind of an ordinary person is instantly transformed into the mind of myo (the supreme enlightenment) of a Buddha. The lotus flower symbolizes this simultaneity of cause and effect. Maintaining the Mind of Myo Is the Mystic Kyo Nichiren Daishonin explains that kyo, meaning “sutra,” of Myoho-renge-kyo also refers to realiz.ing the mystic nature of life. He says: “If we understand that our life at this moment is myo, then we will also understand that our life at other moments is the Mystic Law. This realization is the mystic kyo, or sutra” (WND-1, 4). Kyo is written with a Chinese character indi.cating the vertical thread, or warp, in a loom or fabric, and it is also used to refer to the passage of time. In this respect, Nichiren speaks of our lives or minds at this moment and our lives or minds at other moments. Our lives or minds are con.stantly changing, but when we defeat our inner darkness, or ignorance, through strong faith expressed through our chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo, the innate mystic truth appears within us, and the life of Myoho-renge—literally, lotus of the Mystic Law—blooms within our hearts. Day by day, through consistently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can accumulate the causes and effects for attaining Buddhahood that make it possible to transform a mind clouded by the innate darkness of life into a mind reflecting the essential nature of phenomena and the true aspect of reality (see WND-1, 4). The virtues of these causes and effects over time become the bone and marrow of our beings, with flowers of benefit blossoming in our characters and in our lives. This is the mystic kyo in terms of our indi.vidual lives. Also, we can regard this mystic kyo as the spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to others. When “the mind at this moment” is understood to mean the Buddha’s mind and “the mind at other moments” is taken to mean the minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the Buddha’s teachings that expound aspects of his enlightenment regarding the mystic nature of life, or the mind of myo. And the king of sutras that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the essence of which is Myoho.renge-kyo. In that sense, the development of kosen-rufu, with people propagating the Mystic Law and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for their own happiness and that of others and teaching others to do the same, could be said to correspond to the mystic kyo. As seen in the aforementioned discussion, Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent in our own lives. The ongoing moment-to-moment transfor.mation in our hearts and minds that we achieve through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo not only leads to a fundamental inner change but to a change in the entire way we live our lives, putting us on track to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. And it further creates a groundswell for the great transformation of all humankind that is kosen.rufu. The dynamic force for change on all levels is Myoho-renge-kyo. Becoming the Masters of Our Minds Since Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent within our lives, there is another topic I must touch on. Namely, the relation between the mind of delu.sion clouded by innate darkness and the mind  of myo illuminated by the essential nature of phe.nomena and the true aspect of reality. If we follow the deluded minds of ordinary people—minds that tend to be weak and easily swayed—our inner potential can rapidly wither or, even worse, we may succumb to negative and destructive impulses. This is a problem stemming from the subtlety of the mind. Because our minds are the key to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, we must overcome our own inner weak.nesses. This is what our Buddhist practice is all about. The deluded minds of ordinary people are constantly wavering. We must not make such wavering minds our basis or guide. Nichiren Daishonin emphasizes this by citing the well-known passage “Become the master of your mind rather than let your mind master you” (“Letter to the Brothers,” WND-1, 502). This pas.sage is from the Six Paramitas Sutra, which states to the effect: “Our minds may suddenly run out of control. Therefore, we must tame them like a wild elephant, not allowing our minds to become our masters, but rather seeking to master our minds.”4 The Nirvana Sutra contains a similar passage, “May I be the master of my mind and not let my mind become my master!” (“Letter to Renjo,” WND-2, 5). Nichiren cites this admonition many times, making it a guideline for his followers. Becoming the master of one’s mind means having a sound compass in life and the bright beacon of faith. We must not be mastered by ordi.nary people’s inconstant, weak and ever-changing minds of delusion. To master our minds, we must guide them in the right direction. In that sense, the true master of the mind is the Law and the teachings of the Buddha. Shakyamuni vowed to make the Law to which he had become enlight.ened the master of his mind, and he took pride in living true to that vow. This is the way of life of “taking refuge in the Law” that Shakyamuni emphasized in his final injunction to his disciples before he died.5 The priests of the various Buddhist schools during Nichiren’s lifetime had forgotten this spirit of Shakyamuni. Following their own arbi.trary minds or thinking, they lost sight of the Buddha’s teachings, denigrated the Lotus Sutra and succumbed to arrogance. By contrast, Nichi.ren taught that the true master of the mind is Myoho-renge-kyo—the heart of the Lotus Sutra and the fundamental Law of all Buddhas—and set forth the concrete practice of chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo for mastering one’s mind. Also, he frequently stressed to his followers the impor.tant spirit of faith to seek this true master of the mind—the Mystic Law. For example, when, on account of his faith, the elder of the Ikegami brothers6 was disowned by their father, Nichiren encouraged the two brothers, saying that this was precisely the time for them, based on faith, to unite and overcome the situa.tion. He offers them this guidance: “A passage in the Six Paramitas Sutra says to become the master of your mind rather than let your mind master you. Whatever trouble occurs, regard it as no more than a dream, and think only of the Lotus Sutra” (“Letter to the Brothers,” WND-1, 502). No matter what difficult circumstances we may face, we can break through them without fail as long as our faith does not waver. Faith is a battle against our own inner weaknesses. Nichiren teaches that to win in this battle, we must base our lives wholeheartedly on the essence of the Lotus Sutra—the Mystic Law of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—without being swayed by weak-heartedness. The Path of Mentor and Disciple Based on the Law From the story of the Ikegami brothers’ tri.umph, we also learn the faith of the oneness of mentor and disciple. Because the brothers conducted themselves exactly as Nichiren Dai.shonin instructed, they could overcome their ordeal; discern the scheming of Ryokan, chief priest of Gokuraku-ji, behind their father’s actions; and in the end win the dramatic victory of their father taking faith. To allow ourselves to be mastered by our minds is to lead a self-centered existence. Ulti.mately, we will be pulled this way and that by our constantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism and sink into the depths of darkness or igno.rance. Conversely, to become the master of our minds is to live based on the Law. A teacher or mentor in Buddhism is one who leads and connects people to the Law—teaching them that the Law on which they should depend already exists within their own lives. The disciples in turn seek the mentor, who embodies and is one with the Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, they exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. In this way, they lead lives in which they become masters of their minds. In other words, the existence of a mentor— one who embodies and lives in complete accord with the Law, and who teaches people about the vast inner potential they possess—is indispen.sable for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. I had a mentor who practiced as the Buddha taught—our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei Toda, who dedicated his life to widely propagating Nichiren Buddhism in the modern age—and that has made me who I am today. President Toda is always with me as my spiritual mentor. Even now, day after day, and moment by moment, I am carrying on a dialogue with my mentor in my heart. This is the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple. Those who hold fast to their spiritual mentor as their com.pass and exert themselves as that mentor teaches are people who live based on the Law. Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching founded on the oneness of mentor and disciple. And the Lotus Sutra is likewise a scripture of the oneness of mentor and disciple. At the end of this writing, to convey the importance of the mentor-disciple relationship in walking the great path of attaining Buddha-hood in this lifetime, Nichiren cites a passage from the “Supernatural Powers” chapter of the Lotus Sutra.7 Next time, I will discuss the pro.found meaning of this passage, but suffice it to say here that the path to attaining Buddhahood is found in the practice of Bodhisattvas of the Earth who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the Law inherent in their lives, for both their own happiness and that of others, and who teach others to do the same. Above all, the great path to attaining Buddha-hood in this lifetime lies in practicing faith with the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple, making our minds one with the lofty mind of the Buddha and not being swayed by our inner darkness or the three poisons—greed, anger and foolishness. Faith based on the mentor-disciple spirit is the key to opening the treasure within our lives that is as vast as the universe. Moreover, courageously exerting ourselves in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and taking action for kosen-rufu is the direct path to attaining Buddha-hood in this lifetime. On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime 1. Nagarjuna: A Mahayana scholar of southern India, thought to have lived between the years 150 and 250, who is especially known for his systematization of the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. Nonsubstantial.ity is the concept that things and phenomena have no fixed or independent nature or existence of their own. Nagarjuna integrated the practical doctrine of the Middle Way, transcending both asceti.cism and hedonism, and the concept of dependent origination into the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. In other words, by viewing all things not as entities with an eternally fixed nature but as always assuming a temporary and changing aspect through their relation to other things (i.e., dependent origination), one can act based on a true per.ception of reality, without either attachment or fixed prejudices (i.e., the Middle Way). 2. Unification of the three truths: Based on the section in Nagarjuna’s Treatise on the Middle Way that integrates the concepts of nonsubstan.tiality, dependent origination and the Middle Way, the Great Teacher T’ien-t’ai established the doctrine of the three truths: the truth of nonsubstantiality, the truth of temporary existence and the truth of the Middle Way. Further, he clarified that these truths, rather than being separate and independent of one another, are three ways of viewing any particular thing or entity, and that the three moreover constitute an integral whole, each possessing all three within itself. This is called the unification of the three truths. 3. Threefold contemplation in a single mind: A method of meditation formulated by T’ien-t’ai to enable people to perceive the unification of the three truths of nonsubstantiality, temporary existence and the Middle Way. While the concept of the unification of the three truths constitutes the doctrinal core of T’ien-t’ai’s teaching, the threefold contemplation in a single mind constitutes the core of the T’ien-t’ai practice. This contemplation involves perceiving the three truths as simultaneously and perfectly integrated and interfused in each phe.nomenon. It is equal to observing a single moment of life and seeing the three thousand realms within it. At the same time, one perceives that all phenomena consist of the three thousand realms. 4. The Six Paramitas Sutra states: “If you are always the master of your mind rather than letting your mind master you, your mind will not run amok. It is just like taming an elephant.” 5. The Buddha said: “[L]ive as islands unto yourselves, being your own refuge, with no one else as your refuge, with the Dhamma [i.e., Dhar.ma, or Law] as an island, with the Dhamma as your refuge, with no other refuge.” Mahaparinibbana Sutta: The Great Passing—The Bud.dha’s Last Days, in The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of the Digha Nikaya, translated by Maurice Walshe (Boston: Wisdom Publications, 1995), p. 245. 6. Ikegami brothers: Leading disciples of Nichiren Daishonin. The elder brother, Munenaka, was twice disowned by the father, a follower of Ryokan. At the same time, the father tempted Munenaga, the younger brother, to abandon his faith and take his brother’s place as the next head of the family. Despite these adversities, the brothers persevered in faith. The father rescinded Munenaka’s disinheritance and in the end took faith in Nichiren’s teachings. 7. The passage states: “After I [Shakyamuni] have passed into extinction,/ [one] should accept and uphold this sutra./ Such a person assuredly and without doubt/ will attain the Buddha way” (WND-1, 4; LSOC, 318). Key Points The Meaning of Myo—the Middle Way Nichiren describes this unfathomable nature of the mind as the “mystic entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality” (WND-1, 4). The Middle Way does not simply mean the middle course between two extremes; it refers to a more lofty perspective that is swayed by neither extreme but also embraces them both. Shakyamuni set forth a sound philosophy and practice transcending the two then-prevailing extremes of hedonism and asceticism, and he called this the Middle Way. In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren says that the ultimate truth, which transcends the two extremes of existence and nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of truth, he calls it the “ultimate reality.” Transcending existence and nonexistence can be taken to mean transcending impermanent phenomena that alternate ceaselessly between existence and nonex.istence. Further, exhibiting the qualities of both existence and nonexistence while transcending both does not refer to a transcendent or absolute being divorced from impermanent phenomena, but indicates the truly eternal that encompasses and resides within impermanent phenomena. (p. 48) The Meaning of Renge— the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect The Mystic Law is not visible to the human eye. Therefore, the Buddha uses a concrete symbol in order to help people understand the Law’s won.drous and mystic nature. This is renge, meaning “lotus flower.” Why does he employ the lotus flower? Usually plants flower first and then bear fruit—a relationship that is used to illustrate linear or sequential causality, with the flowers representing the cause and the fruit the effect. In Buddhism, this is referred to as the nonsimultane.ity of cause and effect. By contrast, the lotus flower puts forth its petals and its receptacle (which con.tains its fruit) simultaneously—in other words, its fruit is produced at the same time its petals open. The lotus thus symbolizes the principle of the simultaneity of cause and effect. (p. 48) The Meaning of Kyo—the Practice for Oneself and Others We can regard this mystic kyo as the spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to others. When “the mind at this moment” is understood to mean the Buddha’s mind and “the mind at other moments” is taken to mean the minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the Buddha’s teachings that expound aspects of his enlightenment regarding the mystic nature of life, or the mind of myo. And the king of sutras that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the essence of which is Myoho-renge-kyo. In that sense, the development of kosen-rufu, with peo.ple propagating the Mystic Law and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for their own happiness and that of others and teaching others to do the same, could be said to corre.spond to the mystic kyo. (p. 49) Mastering One’s Mind— the Path of Mentor and Disciple To allow ourselves to be mastered by our minds is to lead a self-centered existence. Ultimately, we will be pulled this way and that by our con.stantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism and sink into the depths of darkness or ignorance. Conversely, to become the master of our minds is to live based on the Law. A teacher or mentor in Buddhism is one who leads and connects people to the Law—teaching them that the Law on which they should depend already exists within their own lives. The disciples in turn seek the mentor, who embodies and is one with the Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, they exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. In this way, they lead lives in which they become masters of their minds. In other words, the existence of a mentor—one who embodies and lives in complete accord with the Law, and who teaches people about the vast inner potential they possess—is indispensable for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. (p. 51) On Attaining In This Lifetime [7] Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime— Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the Oneness of Mentor and Disciple  If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle [that the entity of your life is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law], you are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states, “After I have passed into extinction, [one] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way” [The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 318]. Never doubt in the slightest. Respectfully. Maintain your faith and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nam-myoho.renge-kyo, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. —Nichiren (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4) Birds follow the path of birds, and fish attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime—for all follow the path of fish. Similarly, there humankind. This path is none other than the is a path for us to follow in life for practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. achieving happiness as human beings. Ordi-The path of chanting Nam-myoho-renge.nary people cannot easily see this correct kyo is, in a sense, the most natural way for path, but to the Buddha it is as plain as day. human beings to achieve enlightenment. This Nichiren Daishonin opened the indestruc-is because it is the means for us to reveal the tible path to happiness—the great path of “mystic truth that is originally inherent” in our lives (see WND-1, 3). Nichiren emphasizes the very natural way in which chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo allows us to manifest this innate mystic truth. For instance, he writes (and I have inserted the italics in these passages): Shakyamuni’s practices and the virtues he consequently attained are all con.tained within the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo. If we believe in these five characters, we will naturally be granted the same benefits as he was. (“The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” WND-1, 365) The five characters of Myoho-renge.kyo do not represent the sutra text, nor are they its meaning. They are nothing other than the intent of the entire sutra. So, even though the beginners in Buddhist practice may not understand their significance, by practicing these five characters, they will naturally con.form to the sutra’s intent. (“On the Four Stages of Faith and the Five Stages of Practice,” WND-1, 788) If we do not harbor doubts in our hearts, we will as a matter of course attain Buddhahood. (“The Opening of the Eyes,” WND-1, 283) Because Myoho-renge-kyo is the inherent Law of life to which the Buddha became enlightened, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo represents an unerring practice for us to gain enlightenment. Hence, Nichiren says, “You are certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime” (WND-1, 4). We may call it the most natural path, how.ever, that does not mean that we do not have to make personal effort. As with any path, in order to enable many people to follow it, the way has to be opened, obstructions must be removed and a clear pathway must be trodden. Similarly, the path of chanting entails a struggle to maintain faith that Myoho-renge-kyo exists within us and to defeat the fundamental dark.ness inherent in our lives. When we embrace the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo, we can positively transform the cycles of negativity, delusion and suffering that our lives have repeatedly undergone as a result of innate darkness or ignorance. We can naturally engrave deep within us the causality for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Here, faith is the cause, and manifesting the life-state of Buddhahood is the effect. “To engrave the causality for attaining Bud.dhahood deep in our lives,” therefore, is to vanquish through faith the inner darkness that is the source of evil and misery, and to bring the rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo, the inherent mystic truth, to pulse vibrantly in our lives. The life-state of Buddhahood is perfectly in tune with this rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo. Through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the causality of Buddhahood will come to sup.plant the causality of negativity that has existed in our lives. And when we forge strong faith that is impervious to any attack of fundamen.tal darkness or devilish functions, the causality for attaining Buddhahood takes root in the very core of our beings. Faith, therefore, is absolutely crucial. That is why Nichiren underscores the importance of having “deep faith” in sharing the principle that our lives are entities of the Mystic Law (see WND-1, 4). Indeed, we find Nichiren stressing the importance of faith throughout “On Attaining Buddhahood in this Lifetime.” For instance, he writes: “Summon up deep faith” (WND-1, 3), and “Arouse deep faith” (WND-1, 4). He teaches that deepening our faith is the royal road to achieving enlightenment. The key to our enlightenment as ordinary people ultimately depends on how deeply we can believe this truth—that, by manifesting the Mystic Law inherent within our lives, we can definitely attain Buddhahood. “Were They Not Bodhisattvas of the Earth, They Could Not Chant the Daimoku” The kind of faith needed for attaining Buddha-hood in this lifetime could thus be described as faith that grows ever deeper. Such faith is truly the hallmark of Bodhisattvas of the Earth.1 Nichiren Daishonin writes, “These bodhi.sattvas are the ones who had thoroughly forged their resolve”—in other words, they possessed “thoroughly forged faith” (“General Stone Tiger,” WND-1, 953). At the end of “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren cites the following passage from the “Supernatural Powers of the Thus Come One” chapter of the Lotus Sutra: “After I have passed into extinction, [one] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way” (LSOC, 318). He quotes this as scriptural evidence of gaining enlighten.ment through chanting the daimoku [or title] of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo. We can read this passage to mean that the thoroughly forged faith of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is precisely the faith required for attaining Bud.dhahood in this lifetime. In the “Supernatural Powers” chapter, Shakyamuni Buddha transfers the essence of the Lotus Sutra2 to Bodhisattva Superior Prac.tices and the other Bodhisattvas of the Earth. He then outlines how these bodhisattvas should exert themselves in propagating the sutra after his passing. The above passage cited by Nichiren at the end of “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime” is the conclud.ing part of Shakyamuni’s description of benefits to be gained as a result of those efforts. Here, “[one] should accept and uphold this sutra” means accepting and upholding the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo—the essence of the teach.ing transmitted by the Buddha to Bodhisattva Superior Practices. In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren writes, “Were they not Bodhisattvas of the Earth, they could not chant the daimoku” (WND-1, 385). What is it that makes the chant.ing of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo so difficult then? Viewed from one perspective, it is because breaking through fundamental darkness and triumphing over devilish functions requires us to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with strong, thoroughly forged faith. Chanting and Teaching Others To Do the Same Further, the true significance of the Bodhi.sattvas of the Earth’s practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo lies in their not only carrying out this practice themselves but teach.ing others to do the same. In other words, it is a practice for both self and others. SGI President Ikeda at the November 10, 2006, Headquarters Leaders Meeting in Tokyo, Japan. In his treatise “The Three Great Secret Laws,” Nichiren Daishonin notes that, in the Middle Day of the Law, T’ien-t’ai and his teacher Nan-Yh both chanted the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra, but they did so merely as a private practice and did not teach it to others. Nichiren clarifies that, in contrast, he not only chants it himself but teaches this practice to others.3 The daimoku of the Middle Day remained merely an emblem for perceiving the mystic truth; it was not employed to actually lead peo.ple to enlightenment. In contrast, the daimoku of Nichiren Daishonin encompasses both prac.tice for oneself and others—it has the actual power, when chanted with thoroughly forged faith, to break through fundamental darkness and enable all people to reveal their innate Buddhahood. Also, in “The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” Nichiren refers to the practice of chanting that he established as the “actual practice of the five characters of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo” (WND-1, 375). “Actual practice” here means chanting Nam-myoho.renge-kyo in terms of both faith and practice,4 and establishing the causality of Buddhahood as a reality in one’s life. The actual practice of daimoku of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of the Law means chanting Nam-myoho-renge.kyo for the enlightenment of all people—a practice aiming for the happiness of both oneself and others. As Nichiren indicates when he says “At first only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three, and a hundred followed,” the essence of this practice is chanting it ourselves and also teaching it to others (“The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” WND-1, 385). The Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted by the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is characterized by deep, thoroughly forged faith to overcome darkness and devilish functions, and by practice for both ourselves and others. Its essence, in short, is faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. Shortly after Nichiren proclaimed the estab.lishment of his teaching, ready and resolved to battle all obstacles, he composed this writing, in which he explains the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. We must never for.get how Nichiren’s life, a momentous struggle to spread the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo, was a succession of great difficulties and perse.cutions. Without a solid focus on how Nichiren propagated the Mystic Law, any discussion of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime will just be empty intellectualizing. We should carefully ponder Nichiren’s words “From the time that I was born until today, I have never known a moment’s ease; I have thought only of propagating the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra” (“Persecution by Sword and Staff,” WND-1, 965). The Faith of the Soka Gakkai Is Directly Connected to Nichiren In the present age, it is the first three presidents of the Soka Gakkai [Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei Toda and I], sharing the bonds of mentor and disciple, who have persevered in the struggle to propagate Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin. The first three presidents alone, without begrudging their lives, have fought against great hardships and persecutions like those described in the Lotus Sutra—hatred and jealousy, slander and abuse, the six difficult and nine easy acts,5 and the three powerful enemies.6 Nichiren’s true lifeblood or heritage flows in the mentors and disciples united for kosen-rufu. Now, the sound of the chant of true Bodhisattvas of the Earth resounds throughout the world. Without the kosen-rufu- directed faith and obstacle-defeating daimoku practiced and spread by the Soka Gakkai, the practice of Nichiren Buddhism for attaining Buddha-hood in this lifetime would not exist today. A fighting faith through which we take on and overcome the three obstacles and four dev.ils opens the life-state of Buddhahood. There is no attaining enlightenment without struggling against the three powerful enemies. Those who work unceasingly for kosen-rufu are genuine Buddhas. Our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei Toda, taught us the substance of the great state of Buddhahood in concrete terms. Mr. Toda’s life was not an easy, uneventful one; it was a life of painful vicissitudes. To seek in Buddhism a life of peace and quiet, free of trouble, goes against its basic tenets. The lives of Shakyamuni Buddha and Nichiren Daishonin were fierce struggles, any.thing but tranquil and trouble-free. It could be said that the genuine spirit of Buddhism lies in establishing a towering, indestructible state of life that not even the harshest obstacle can harm. True attainment of Buddhahood in this lifetime means con.structing strong faith that will absolutely not be defeated by devilish functions. This is what both Shakyamuni and Nichiren taught through their own examples. Viewed from the Buddhist perspective, Mr. Toda dedicated his life to demonstrating the state of Buddhahood of one who follows the highest human path. As his true, direct dis.ciple, I proudly proclaim the great victory of my mentor’s human revolution. Overflowing With Life Force, Fulfilling Our Mission But just what is attaining Buddhahood? In discussing this question, President Toda con.stantly declared it meant securing eternal happiness. “Attaining Buddhahood,” he said, “means achieving a state of being that allows us to always be reborn overflowing with powerful life force, to fulfill our mission to our heart’s content, to achieve all our goals and to possess good fortune that no one can destroy.” These are words of true philosophy that get at the heart of attaining Buddhahood in language that is simple and straightforward. Mr. Toda continued, “And is it not greater still if we can enjoy tens, hundreds, thousands, tens of millions of existences in this way?” I can still hear his voice ringing in my ears, filled with indomitable confidence and conviction like the mighty roar of a lion king. Those who have dedicated themselves to the Mystic Law will, on each successive rebirth, overflow with vibrant life force, accomplish a mission for kosen-rufu that only they can achieve and enjoy immense, indestructible good fortune. They can joyfully savor such lives again and again. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, one could say, allows us to solidly enter this eternal path. Countless Soka Gakkai members have done so. As long as actual proof of the Mystic Law continues to blossom brilliantly in each person’s life, the faith of the Soka Gakkai will shine eternally. Mr. Toda declared that the life of each Soka Gakkai member would be recorded in future sutras as “Soka Gakkai Buddha.” Of course, each aspect of birth, aging, sick.ness and death is part of the reality of our lives in this world. Our physical bodies cannot escape the changes found in the cycle of forma.tion, continuance, decline and disintegration to which all phenomena in the universe are sub.ject. Naturally, our bodies deteriorate as we age. If practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism were to retain youthful bodies forever, it would go against the laws of nature! As we thoroughly polish ourselves through faith, however, the inner essence of our lives will never decay. I hope that all our pioneering and senior members who have dedicated themselves to kosen-rufu with such sincerity over the years will cheerfully, proudly adorn the final chapter of their lives with noble victory, confident of this point. Please continue to strive with the spirit of fresh challenge! Looking at Nichiren’s writings, there is absolutely no doubt that those who forge such a fighting spirit in this existence do attain the lofty spiritual state allowing them to make their way freely, joyfully, through the journey of eternal life. In describing this free, untrammeled state of life that continues across eternity and encompasses the entire universe, Mr. Toda would often say humorously: “We die, but we are reborn. For my part, I would like to come back as a stunning beauty!” He would then go on to joke that this beauty would be famous around the world, with people flocking to buy her photos and get her autograph. Of course, he said, she would never give her autograph to bad or hateful people. Mr. Toda died at fifty-eight—not an old age by any means. The two years he had spent in prison for his beliefs during World War II had left his health seriously damaged. And the intense frenzy of activity over the next several years, which saw him work all out to rebuild the Soka Gakkai and fulfill his duties as presi.dent, also brought bouts of illness. When a Soka Gakkai leader once asked him why he was ill, Mr. Toda answered: “My being sick like this represents a great lessening of karmic retribution.7 Instead of the Soka Gakkai being destroyed, I got this illness.” He also once told someone: “When I die, I think I will return to Nichiren’s side and stay there for about a week or ten days. Given the fact that there are countless planets like the Earth in the universe, if Nichiren bids me to go to one of them and work for kosen-rufu there, I will immediately set out as instructed.” Such was the boundless state of life he pos.sessed, ready to go anywhere to carry out Nichiren’s decree. And Mr. Toda yearned to share this immense state of life with as many people as possible. To convey just a single portion of the enlighten.ment he had gained, he often taught us that the life-state of Buddhahood means absolute happiness. “Absolute happiness,” he said, “is to experience a sense of irrepressible joy in one’s life every day, in one’s life at each moment.” Further, by struggling for kosen-rufu to the very end, we can savor such an expansive state of being during our final days. Mr. Toda taught that this is proof of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime—proof of having entered the path of eternal happiness. Mr. Toda, inspired by the majestic form of indomitable Mount Fuji, dauntlessly took the lead for kosen-rufu until his very last moment. I firmly believe his noble life is an example to all of us of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. The Lion’s Roar of Mentor and Disciple United Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we cannot attain Buddhahood. Through that sort of spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be expressed in various other ways, such as: the spirit of “true cause,” of always starting from now; the resolve to never regress in faith; the heart of a lion king; the refusal to be defeated; faith that grows stronger day by day. Thus Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, chanted with this spirit, is none other than the source of infinite advance. No painful difficulty or karma is an obstacle for the daimoku of lion kings. Nam.myoho-renge-kyo has the power to turn adversity into a springboard for growth, to change karma into mission, to transform even sorrow into a wellspring of creativity. Nichiren Daishonin’s very life pulses in Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The daimoku of Soka Gakkai members struggling for kosen-rufu is the same as the daimoku chanted by our first and second presidents, Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda, to achieve the great desire of the happiness of all humankind. If we forget this fighting daimoku of courageous lion kings, our chanting will deviate from that of our mentors. In that case, our chanting will not produce the sound of the lion’s roar, which is created by mentor and dis.ciple chanting together.8 Not only will it not be the daimoku of Nichiren, it will constitute the practice of an inferior teaching that has no relation to the spirit of Shakyamuni. We may surmise that Nichiren quotes the passage from the “Supernatural Powers” chap.ter in the final section of this writing to teach this solemn spirit of mentor and disciple. Indeed, viewing it in this light accords with the spirit to always base ourselves on Nichiren’s writings, which are the heart of the Soka Gakkai, an organization directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin. He closes “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime” with the admonition: “Never doubt in the slightest . . . Maintain your faith and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime” (WND-1, 4). Faith is absolutely essential. To return to the opening of this writing, Nichiren talks of freeing ourselves from the sufferings of birth and death we have endured since time without beginning and attaining without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime (see WND-1, 3). The purpose of our present existence is to cut the chains of suffering we have endured from the beginningless past and establish the eternal state of Buddhahood. By challenging ourselves with all our hearts so as to have no regrets in this lifetime, we can forge a state of life victorious and free of regret throughout eternity. I know the wonder of supreme happiness and the brilliant victory of a great life. I composed this poem at the start of 2006 with the wish that all SGI members will lead tremendously fulfilling lives. May each of you make your way triumphantly along the path of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, enjoy.ing this “supreme happiness” and the “brilliant victory of a great life.” Let us resolutely win in the struggle to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, which con.denses eternity into this present moment, and let us joyfully continue our journey of kosen.rufu together across eternity. 1. Bodhisattvas of the Earth: Disciples of Shakyamuni from the remote past whom he calls forth in the “Emerging from the Earth” chapter of the Lotus Sutra and entrusts with propagating the Lotus Sutra after his passing. They are known as Bodhisattvas of the Earth for they appear from the earth. Their leader is called Superior Practices. 2. Transfer of the essence of the Lotus Sutra: In the “Supernatural Powers” chapter of the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni entrusts the sutra’s teaching to Bodhisattva Superior Practices and the other Bodhisattvas of the Earth. This is called the “transfer of the essence” because Shakyamuni describes the sutra as containing: 1) “all the doctrines possessed by the Thus Come One”; 2) “all the freely exercised super.natural powers of the Thus Come One”; 3) “the storehouse of all the secret essentials of the Thus Come One”; and 4) “all the most profound matters of the Thus Come One,” adding that “all these are proclaimed, revealed, and clearly expounded in this sutra” (LSOC, 316). 3. Nichiren writes, “Now, however, we have entered the Latter Day of the Law, and the daimoku that I, Nichiren, chant is different from that of earlier ages. This Nam-myoho-renge-kyo encompasses both practice for oneself and the teaching of others” (“On the Receiving of the Three Great Secret Laws,” WND-2, 986). 4. The daimoku of the essential teaching (Nam-myoho-renge-kyo) has two aspects: the daimoku of faith and the daimoku of practice. The former means to believe in the Gohonzon, the latter to chant Nam.myoho-renge-kyo and spread it. 5. Six difficult and nine easy acts: The “Treasure Tower” chapter of the Lotus Sutra explains from six perspectives the difficulty of practicing the Lotus Sutra after Shakyamuni’s passing. By contrast, it describes nine seemingly impossible actions, such as throwing Mount Sumeru into another world system, as comparatively easy (see LSOC 218–19). 6. Three powerful enemies: The verse section of the “Encouraging Devotion” chapter of the Lotus Sutra describes the people who will persecute a person who spreads the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after Shakyamuni’s passing. In his Annotations on “The Words and Phrases of the Lotus Sutra,” Miao-lo describes these people as belonging to three categories: arrogant lay people, arrogant monks and nuns, and arrogant false sages (see LSOC, 233–34). 7. Lessening karmic retribution: The principle that one can experience the effects of bad karma from the past to a lesser degree because of Buddhist faith and practice. 8. The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings says: “The lion’s roar (shishi ku) is the preaching of the Buddha. The preaching of the Law means the preaching of the Lotus Sutra, or the preaching of Nam.myoho-renge-kyo in particular. The first shi of the word shishi, or ‘lion’ [which means ‘teacher’], is the Wonderful Law that is passed on by the teacher. The second shi [which means ‘child’] is the Wonderful Law as it is received by the disciples. The ‘roar’ [of the term ‘lion’s roar’] is the sound of the teacher and the disciples chanting in unison” (OTT, 111). Key Points The Path of Chanting Is the Natural Way To Achieve Enlightenment The path of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is, in a sense, the most natural way for human beings to achieve enlightenment. This is because it is the means for us to reveal the “mystic truth that is originally inherent” in our lives (see WND-1, 3). Nichiren emphasizes the very natural way in which chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo allows us to manifest this innate mystic truth. (pp. 54–55) Strong Faith Is Required To Attain Buddhahood in This Lifetime The kind of faith needed for attaining Buddha-hood in this lifetime could thus be described as faith that grows ever deeper. Such faith is truly the hallmark of Bodhisattvas of the Earth. Nichiren Daishonin writes, “These bodhisattvas are the ones who had thoroughly forged their resolve”—in other words, they possessed “thor.oughly forged faith” (“General Stone Tiger,” WND-1, 953). At the end of “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren cites the following pas.sage from the “Supernatural Powers of the Thus Come One” chapter of the Lotus Sutra: “After I have passed into extinction, [one] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way” (LSOC, 318). He quotes this as scriptural evidence of gaining enlightenment through chanting the daimoku [or title] of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo. We can read this pas.sage to mean that the thoroughly forged faith of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is precisely the faith required for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. (p. 56) Faith Dedicated to Kosen-rufu The actual practice of daimoku of the Bodhi.sattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of the Law means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the enlightenment of all people—a practice aiming for the happiness of both oneself and others. As Nichiren indicates when he says “At first only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three, and a hundred followed,” the essence of this practice is chanting it ourselves and also teaching it to others (“The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” WND-1, 385). The Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted by the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is characterized by deep, thoroughly forged faith to overcome dark.ness and devilish functions, and by practice for both ourselves and others. Its essence, in short, is faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. (pp. 57–58) Opening the Life-State of Buddhahood A fighting faith through which we take on and overcome the three obstacles and four devils opens the life-state of Buddhahood. There is no attaining enlightenment without struggling against the three powerful enemies. Those who work unceasingly for kosen-rufu are genuine Buddhas. (p. 58) Attaining Buddhahood With a Challenging Spirit Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we can.not attain Buddhahood. Through that sort of spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be expressed in various other ways, such as: the spirit of “true cause,” of always starting from now; the resolve to never regress in faith; the heart of a lion king; the refusal to be defeated; faith that grows stronger day by day. (p. 60) Index A action, Buddhist wisdom into, 12; taking, 43, 51 attitude, 29, 32, 34, 41 B bodhisattvas, 39 Bodhisattvas of the Earth, 56; practice of the, 57–58 Buddha(s), 13, 31, 50, 58; and ordinary people, 4, 22, 24, 38–39; Bodhisattva Superior Practices and, 56 Buddhahood, 2–9, 13–14, 17–18, 21–24, 29–34, 39, 41–43, 47, 49–51, 54–61; scriptural evidence of attaining, 56. See also Myoho.renge-kyo; Nam-myoho.renge-kyo Buddhism, 13, 17, 22, 47 C cause and effect, 21, 48–49, 55 challenging spirit, 41 compassion, 43 courage, 34, 41, 43 D daimoku [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo], 56–57, 60–61 “Devadatta” chapter (Lotus Sutra), 4 difficulties, 34, 55 “The Difficulty of Sustaining Faith,” 41 E “Earthly Desires are Enlightenment,” 42 “Emerging from the Earth” chapter (Lotus Sutra), 43 “The Entity of the Mystic Law,” 14 “Expedient Means” chapter (Lotus Sutra), 40 F faith, 3, 5–7, 9, 20–22, 24–25, 30–34, 39–43, 49–51, 55–61; dedicated to kosen-rufu, 58 “The Farther the Source, the Longer the Stream,” 42 fighting spirit, to battle our inner funda.mental darkness, 40, 59, 60 fundamental darkness, 8, 18, 20–21, 24, 29–32, 34, 39–42, 47, 49, 51, 55–58 G “General Stone Tiger,” 56 Gohonzon, 31 grave offenses, 30 H happiness, 2, 13, 21–22, 43 “Happiness in This World,” 21, 41 heart, importance of, 5, 6, 21, 29, 34, 38, 39, 47, 49. See also mind ho, 48 “How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus Sutra,” 23 human existence, 11 humankind, 18; changing destiny of, 8–9, 17, 49. See also kosen-rufu I inner change, 5–6, 8, 29, 38–39, 49 K kosen-rufu, 33, 42, 51, 58–61. See also humankind kyo, 49 L “Letter to Niike,” 24 “Letter to Renjo,” 50 “Letter to the Brothers,” 50 “Life Span” chapter (Lotus Sutra), 14 living true to oneself (Josei Toda), 25 Lotus Sutra, 13–14, 16–17, 22, 33, 38, 49–51, 58 The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, 38 M Mahayana Buddhism, 13, 25 Makiguchi, Tsunesaburo, 7, 33, 58, 60; on Nichiren Buddhism, 43 Manjushri, 39 “The Meaning of the Sacred Teachings of the Buddha’s Lifetime,” 26 mentor-disciple relationship, 33, 43, 51, 58–61 Middle Day, practice of, 57 Middle Way, 48 mind(s), 5–8, 14, 16–17, 21, 29–30, 34, 38–39, 43, 47–51. See also heart myo, 47–49 Myoho-renge-kyo, 14–15, 17, 21, 23, 47, 49, 55. See also Buddhahood; mystic truth; Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Mystic Law, 6, 22–24, 29, 33–34, 39, 50, 56, 59. See also Myoho-renge-kyo; Nam-myoho-renge-kyo mystic truth, 6, 13–17, 21, 41, 47, 49, 55, 57; manifesting the, 4. See also Myoho-renge-kyo N Nagarjuna, 48 Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, 3, 11–12, 15–18, 20–24, 26, 29–34, 38–43, 47, 49–51, 54–55, 57; and fighting spirit, 60; mirror analogy, 6, 37–40, 42, 47. See also Buddha-hood; Myoho-renge-kyo Nan-Yh, 57 negative functions, 55; defeating, 5 Nichikan, 14, 18, 31, 40 Nichiren Buddhism, 2–4, 7–9, 12, 14, 16–18, 20, 26, 30–31, 33–34, 40–41, 43, 50–51, 57–59     Nichiren Daishonin, 2–4, 6–9, 11–15, 17–18, 20–21, 23, 25–26, 28–30, 32, 34, 37–42, 46–49, 54–58, 60–61; admonition of, 24, 31, 50; and human beings, 5 Nirvana Sutra, 50 non-Buddhist thinking, 29–31 O “The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” 21, 55, 57 “On Persecutions Befalling the Sage,” 42 “On the Four Stages of Faith and the Five Stages of Practice,” 55 ordinary people, 4, 21–22, 24, 38, 48, 50, 54, 56 P “Persecution by Sword and Staff,” 58 perseverance, 41–43 polishing our lives, by chanting Nam.myoho-renge-kyo, 39–42 pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, 4, 22–23, 48 present existence, 61 provisional teachings. See pre-Lotus Sutra teachings Pushkin, Aleksandr, 18 R The Record of Orally Transmitted Teach.ings, 29–30, 42–43 religion(s), 22, 25; purpose of, 11 renge, 48–49 Ryokan, 51 S seeking the Law of Nam-myoho-renge.kyo, 6, 8, 25, 28–32 “The Selection of the Time,” 22 SGI, members of the, 3, 9, 33, 61 Shakyamuni, 11, 13–14, 30, 48, 50, 56, 58, 61 Six Paramitas Sutra, 50 Six-Volume Writings (Nichikan), 31 slander, 32–33 Soka Gakkai, 31, 33, 59; members, 42, 59–60; and Nichiren’s writings, 61 “The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra,” 21, 47 substituting faith for wisdom, 30–31, 35 sufferings of birth and death, 2, 3, 4, 11, 12, 13, 28, 37, 38, 39, 61 “Supernatural Powers” chapter (Lotus Sutra), 51, 56, 61 T “The Teaching, Practice and Proof,” 34 “The Three Great Secret Laws,” 57 three thousand realms in a single moment of life, 14, 15, 18, 24 “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” 7, 56, 58 T’ien-t’ai, 14, 16–17, 48, 57; Buddhism of, 30 Toda, Josei, 24, 33, 42, 51, 58; on Bud.dhahood, 59–60; on illness, 60; and the Mystic Law, 25; “Soka Gakkai Buddha,” 59; on the young women’s division, 34; on youth, 43 Toki Jonin, 3 transmigration, 12–13 twenty-first century, transforming, 2 U unity, 33 V victory, 43 Vimalakirti, 39 Vimalakirti Sutra, 38–39 W wisdom, Buddhist, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 30, 32, 38, 43, 48 Notes Notes Notes 