Table of Contents:

* iv Editor’s Note

* 1 “Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—The

* 11 “The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

* 20 “‘If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, You Are

* 28 “Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude—Refusing

* 37 “Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a ‘Brave and

* 46 “The Mystic Nature of Our Lives—‘Become the

* 54 “Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—

* 64 Index

On Attaining

in This Lifetime

Daisaku Ikeda

Published by

World Tribune Press

606 Wilshire Blvd.

Santa Monica, CA 90401

©2011 by the Soka Gakkai • All rights reserved.

Printed in the United States of America.

Design by Lightbourne, Inc.

ISBN 978-1-935523-21-5

10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

C o n t e n t s

iv Editor’s Note

1 “Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—The

Fundamental Purpose of Life and a Source of

Hope for Humankind” (1)

11 “The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo—Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through

Correct Buddhist Practice” (2)

20 “‘If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself, You Are

Not Embracing the Mystic Law’” (3)

28 “Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude—Refusing

To Live an ‘Endless, Painful Austerity’” (4)

37 “Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo With a ‘Brave and

Vigorous’ Spirit—Polishing Our Lives Through Daily

Challenge” (5)

46 “The Mystic Nature of Our Lives—‘Become the

Master of Your Mind Rather Than Let Your Mind

Master You’” (6)

54 “Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—

Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path of the

Oneness of Mentor and Disciple” (7)

64 Index

iii

E d i t o r’ s N o t e

T his series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda was published in SGI-USA’s Living Buddhism from the September – October 2006 issue through the March – April 2007 issue.

Please also see The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, pp. 3–5, for “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime.”

• GZ, page number(s)—refers to the Gosho zenshu, the Japanese-

language compilation of letters, treatises, essays and oral

teachings of Nichiren Daishonin.

• LSOC, page number(s)—refers to The Lotus Sutra and Its

Opening and Closing Sutras, translated by Burton Watson (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2009).

• OTT, page number(s)—refers to The Record of the Orally

Transmitted Teachings, translated by Burton Watson (Soka Gakkai: Tokyo, 2004).

• WND, page number(s)—refers to The Writings of Nichiren

Daishonin, vol. 1 (WND-1) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 1999) and vol. 2 (WND-2) (Tokyo: Soka Gakkai, 2006).

iv

On Attaining

in This Lifetime

SGI President Ikeda’s Lecture Series

This is a series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on the writing “On Attaining

Buddhahood in This Lifetime.” He writes, “Nichiren Daishonin’s profound teaching

of attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime can powerfully transform the age and

open a bright future for our modern world in the twenty-first century.”

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

[Chapter 1]

Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—

The Fundamental Purpose of Life and

a Source of Hope for Humankind

If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have

endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed

enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is orig-

inally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting

Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate

in all life. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3)

Just what constitutes a deeply meaningful life? attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime was a What is true happiness? Nichiren Buddhism revolutionary concept that turned prevailing is a teaching of hope that enables us to forge Buddhist thought on its head. Indeed, it con-a state of unsurpassed and indestructible happi-tinues to shine today as a principle that can ness and to lead a life of supreme value, while powerfully transform the age and open a bright also helping others do the same. future for our modern world in the twenty-first

All people have the potential to attain century. Buddhahood; moreover, they can gain that lofty Therefore, I look forward to studying state just as they are and in fact are assured Nichiren’s writing “On Attaining Buddhahood in of being able to do so in this lifetime. Nichiren This Lifetime” together with you, as we embark in Buddhism clearly elucidates this wonderful path high spirits on a new journey of growth and to enlightenment. development toward the Soka Gakkai’s eightieth

Nichiren Daishonin’s profound teaching of anniversary (in 2010).

The Profound Meaning of darkness—a battle against the negative and

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo destructive forces within us. It means that

through the power of faith—in other words,

“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime” is through strengthening our conviction that we

an important writing that clarifies the basic possess the Buddha nature—we can break

theory and practice of Nichiren Buddhism. SGI through the darkness obscuring this awareness,

members throughout the globe have deepened thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood.

their understanding of the essence of Nichiren Chanting in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers

Daishonin’s teachings by earnestly studying this to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves

writing as a guideline for practice and study. and also teaching it to others. It means making

Although the original is no longer extant and efforts in word and deed for our own and others’

the precise date and name of the recipient are happiness in the course of our spiritual struggle

unknown, this letter is traditionally thought to against inner negativity and illusion. have been written around 1255 and addressed to When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we

Toki Jonin.1 The assertion that it was composed are both chanting the name of, and calling forth,

in 1255, shortly after Nichiren publicly declared the Buddha nature in our own lives and the lives

his teaching of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in 1253, is of others. Through applying our practice of faith

credible in view of the letter’s content, explaining to win over doubt and delusion, the power of our

as it does the significance of chanting Nam- inherent Buddha nature is called forth by the

myoho-renge-kyo in terms of both theory and sound of our chanting and spontaneously mani-

practice. fests in our lives.2

The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge- The key point that sets Nichiren Buddhism

kyo is the foundation of Nichiren’s lifetime of apart from the other Buddhist schools of his day

teachings. Nichiren Buddhism, unlike the estab- was the establishment of this concrete means

lished Buddhist schools of his day, was not for attaining Buddhahood. And from the time he

dedicated to the worship of a specific god or Bud- first declared Nam-myoho-renge-kyo until the

dha. Nichiren established the means for all people moment of his death, Nichiren ardently strove to

to achieve enlightenment, the ideal of the Lotus teach this supreme path of enlightenment to peo-

Sutra, by formulating the practice of chanting ple throughout the land. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which enables us to acti- In the opening passage of “On Attaining Bud-

vate our inherent Buddha nature and manifest it dhahood in This Lifetime,” Nichiren clearly and

as the life-state of Buddhahood. fully articulates the basic philosophy of enlight-

In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam- enment that lies at the heart of his teaching,

myoho-renge-kyo has two aspects: the chanting which exists for the happiness of all humanity: “If

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of

chanting in terms of practice. Chanting in terms birth and death you have endured since time

of faith refers to the spiritual aspect of our prac- without beginning and to attain without fail

tice. This essentially consists of the struggle we unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you

wage in our hearts against our inner delusion or must perceive the mystic truth that is originally

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho- by manifesting within us the mystic truth inher-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo will ent in all living beings, we can free ourselves from therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth the endless sufferings of birth and death. The innate in all life” (WND-1, 3). name of that mystic truth is Myoho-renge-kyo,

We’ll discuss the profound meaning of this and the way to manifest it is through chanting passage in detail next time. But briefly, it says that Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

The Significance of Our Existence as Human Beings

Nevertheless, even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you

think the Law is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but

an inferior teaching. (WND-1, 3)

The concept of attaining Buddhahood in life-state of Buddhahood is at one with the eter-this lifetime refers to ordinary people nal Mystic Law and abounds with infinite wisdom becoming enlightened during the course and compassion, it tended to be seen as some-of their present existences. By extension, it means thing completely separate and removed from the that they can achieve this just as they are. As such, lives of ordinary people steeped in illusion.

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime means Attaining enlightenment was thought to require the same thing as attaining Buddhahood in one’s overcoming the unfathomably deep chasm

present form, which is the Lotus Sutra’s approach between the spiritual states of a Buddha and ordi-to Buddhahood and illustrated by the example nary people, and this gave rise to the idea that it

of the dragon king’s daughter3 in the sutra’s was necessary to carry out austere practices for “Devadatta” chapter. innumerable kalpas.4

This view contrasts sharply with the pre- Nichiren Buddhism clarifies that it is specifi-

Lotus Sutra teachings, which expound that one cally in this present existence, in which we have can become enlightened only after practicing been born as human beings, that we can actualize

austerities over countless lifetimes. Because the the principle of attaining Buddhahood in one’s

SGI President Ikeda

ress at Soka University, P

o Hachioji, Tokyo, Seiky on May 5, 2006.

present form as explained in the Lotus Sutra. And Will we transmigrate forever along the paths of

Nichiren Daishonin reveals how to actualize this evil, or can we succeed in directing our lives into

profound teaching. an orbit of good?

Drawing an analogy to rice crops, Nichiren As evidenced in many of his writings,

notes that while some ripen early and some ripen Nichiren repeatedly stresses the crucial impor-

late, they will all mature and be ready for harvest tance of the heart, or mind. In this inner realm of

within the year. He explains that votaries of the life, the potential resides for dramatic shifts from

Lotus Sutra will likewise attain Buddhahood in evil to good or from good to evil. That is why

this existence without fail.5 Nichiren’s teaching of enlightenment can be

Nichiren places importance on the present viewed as a process that begins with inner change.

lifetime of human beings. Of course, not only In other words, through the power of faith, we

humans but also all living beings possess the can defeat the negative functions inside us that Buddha nature and have the potential to attain are governed by the fundamental darkness in all

Buddhahood in their present form, but Nichiren’s human hearts and manifest the positive functions

focus is always first and foremost on the happi- of life that are one with the Dharma nature—our

ness of human beings. Buddhahood.

The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted This present lifetime, in which we have been

and rich; it has the capacity for magnificent born as human beings, represents a golden

achievement. For that very reason, the heart often opportunity to ensure that our lives no longer

undergoes great suffering and torment, and can transmigrate along the evil paths but instead

become trapped in an endless, downward spiral. traverse the paths of good.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Emphasis on Inner Change

Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon up deep

faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. (WND-1, 3)

Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day and night. How

should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (WND-1, 4)

In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life- Nichiren explains that the key to chanting time,” Nichiren Daishonin thoroughly explains Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is summoning up deep that we cannot achieve enlightenment without faith, or confidence, in the existence of our innate a profound change in our lives, in our hearts and Buddhahood. He declares that when we do so, we minds. can polish our lives and reveal our enlightenment,

First, he writes that the mystic truth with which writing: “Therefore, when you chant myoho and all living beings are endowed reveals “the principle recite renge [that is, chant Nam-myoho-renge-of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single kyo], you must summon up deep faith that moment of life and all phenomena” (WND-1, 3). Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself [literally, What this means is that our lives or our minds at your mind at each moment]” (WND-1, 3). He each moment both embody all phenomena and continues: “Arouse deep faith, and diligently pervade all phenomena. This could be described as polish your mirror day and night. How should you a life-state of oneness with the universe. polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

Also, Nichiren warns that if we seek the Mystic kyo” (WND-1, 4). Law outside ourselves, then no matter how much In addition, Nichiren speaks of “the mystic we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we cannot entity of the Middle Way that is the ultimate manifest the condition of enlightenment; on the reality” (WND-1, 4)—in other words, the mystic, contrary, our Buddhist practice will only “become inscrutable nature of life, of our hearts and an endless, painful austerity” (WND-1, 4). He minds, that manifests as Buddhahood. Here, he clearly states: “Even though you chant and believe indicates that Myoho-renge-kyo is the wonderful in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law is out- law of life, of the inner realm of our beings. side yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic On that basis, he asserts that when we chant Law but an inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in the

Mystic Law, we can reveal our Buddhahood in this of all of us living beings, that is not so. On the

lifetime. Nichiren writes: “The Lotus Sutra is the contrary, it is common mortals who endow him

king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for with the three virtues” (WND-1, 384). This pas-

it explains that the entity of our life [literally, our sage describes a shift from an authoritarian to a

mind or inner reality], which manifests either good humanistic, people-centered religion.6 The or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the teaching of Nichiren, who established the con-

Mystic Law. If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with crete means for achieving enlightenment in this

deep faith in this principle, you are certain to attain lifetime, makes this shift possible. Buddhahood in this lifetime” (WND-1, 4). When the Soka Gakkai’s first president,

Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, formulated his theory of

value, he did not include the aspects of “holiness”

A Teaching of Genuine Humanism

or “sacredness,” which many thinkers before him

Next, I’ll touch on the significance of Nichiren had considered to constitute religious value. For

Daishonin’s teaching of attaining Buddhahood in Mr. Makiguchi, “great good” was deemed the high-

this lifetime from three perspectives. est value a religion should strive to realize. By “great

I’ll start by pointing out that through opening good,” he is referring to the highest value that can

the way for all people to attain Buddhahood in be actualized by human beings and society. In

this lifetime through chanting Nam-myoho- Mr. Makiguchi’s theory of value, we find the view

renge-kyo, Nichiren established for the first time that a true religion is one that serves the welfare of

a teaching of genuine humanism. Opening the human beings. Nichiren’s opening of the path to

way to enlightenment for all people could be attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime signifies

called the prerequisite for a genuinely humanistic the establishment of a religion that contributes

religion. This, I believe, is the religious or philo- to the happiness of human beings in the greatest

sophical significance of the principle of attaining possible way. Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Nichiren had deep insight into the potential

The Significance of Attaining

of human beings, discerning that they could free Buddhahood for Our Lives themselves from a cycle of negative transmigra-

tion and realize a positive one through profound Second, by opening the path to attaining Buddha-

inner change. And he set forth a practical way to hood in this lifetime, Nichiren Daishonin made it

enable all people to achieve this. Consequently, possible for us to lead lives based on the infinite

there is no other teaching that can more power of the Mystic Law—that is, to lead solid

deservedly be called humanistic than Nichiren and secure lives that give us the courage and con-

Buddhism. fidence to be self-reliant. This is the significance

In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” of the principle of attaining Buddhahood in this

Nichiren writes: “Though it is thought that lifetime in terms of our individual lives. Shakyamuni Buddha possesses the three virtues In Nichiren Buddhism, attaining enlightenment

of sovereign, teacher, and parent for the sake is not about embarking on some inconceivably long

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

journey to become a resplendent, godlike Buddha; Only by winning over our inner darkness it is about accomplishing a transformation in the and negativity can we be victorious in life and depths of one’s being. This revolutionary view reveal our full potential. The same is true if we of enlightenment fundamentally changed the wish to savor true fulfillment. Allow me to meaning of Buddhist practice from how it was emphasize, then, that the Nichiren Buddhist traditionally viewed. practice toward attaining Buddhahood in this

In other words, it is not a matter of practicing in lifetime is the only means to conquer the dark-order to scale the highest summit of enlightenment ness and delusion that are the fundamental at some point in the distant future. Rather, it is source of human evil, and cultivate true inde-a constant, moment-to-moment, inner struggle pendence. It allows us to construct a solid self, between revealing our innate Dharma nature or and achieve a state of life of boundless happi-allowing ourselves to be ruled by our fundamental ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood darkness and delusion. This unceasing effort to pol- in this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental

ish our lives is the essence of Buddhist practice. purpose of an individual’s life.

The Significance of Attaining Buddhahood for Humanity

The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the direct path to enlightenment, for it

explains that the entity of our life, which manifests either good or evil at each

moment, is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law.

If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle, you are

certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states,

“After I have passed into extinction, [one] should accept and uphold this sutra.

Such a person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way.” Never

doubt in the slightest. (WND-1, 4)

Third, the principle of attaining Buddhahood realm has been neglected and all too many people in this lifetime is significant in that it offers are obsessed with seeking comfort, ease and pleasure a source of hope to humanity and opens the in external things—things outside of themselves. way to transforming the destiny of all humankind. Without surmounting the fundamental human This is its collective or universal significance. delusions of greed, anger and foolishness, we can-

Many leading thinkers and intellectuals recog- not solve the many problems that the world faces nize that modern civilization has lost sight of the today, including the preoccupation with economic human being and become deadlocked on many growth, politics that are devoid of humanism, fronts. There is no denying that the inner spiritual international conflicts, warfare, growing disparity

between rich and poor, and rampant discrimina- us that we should have complete confidence in

tion. One conclusion from my dialogues with the revealing of our Buddhahood in this lifetime.

leading thinkers is that the only real solution is for His words also contain the warning that unless we

human beings themselves to change, that the sole maintain this strong confidence, or faith, we can

key lies in human revolution. easily lose sight of the fundamental goal of attain-

It could further be said that without establish- ing Buddhahood in this lifetime and fall into the

ing a correct view of life and death, it is depths of darkness and delusion. impossible to conquer inner darkness and delu- All people at the core of their lives yearn to

sion at the most fundamental level. Without the attain enlightenment. But there is no teaching

Middle Way view of life and death—a view that more difficult to believe or understand than the

rejects the extremes of the doctrine of annihila- teaching that we can definitely manifest the state

tion and the doctrine of eternity7—true and of Buddhahood in our present existence. We of

lasting happiness cannot be achieved. the SGI have taken on the challenge of practicing

The only way for human beings to change is this profound teaching and sharing it widely with

for them to conquer their inner darkness and others around the globe. rediscover the eternal dignity within their own In today’s world, we, the courageous Bodhi-

lives. Cultivating the noble spirit with which all sattvas of the Earth, are showing great actual

people are originally endowed will directly lead to proof of humankind’s potential to transform

a change in the destiny of humankind. With that its destiny. Proud of our noble mission, let us

conviction, we of the SGI have been working to continue to joyously spread Nichiren Buddhism—

build a network of good all around the globe. with its teaching of attaining Buddhahood in this

In the course of these lectures, I will comment lifetime that enables all people to achieve unsur-

further on the growing expectations and praise for passed happiness—and lead the most valuable

this unprecedented endeavor we are undertaking. and fulfilling lives possible.

At the end of “On Attaining Buddhahood in

This Lifetime,” Nichiren Daishonin writes: “Never

doubt in the slightest” (WND-1, 4). He is telling

1. Toki Jonin: A lay follower of Nichiren Daishonin. He lived in Wakamiya, dragon form and preaches the Lotus Sutra to all living beings there (see

Katsushika District of Shimosa Province (part of present-day Chiba Prefec- The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, pp. 226 –28).

ture) and served as a retainer to Lord Chiba. He was the recipient of many 4. In ancient Indian cosmology, an extremely long period of time.

of Nichiren’s writings, including “The Object of Devotion for Observing 5. In his writing “The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms in a Single

the Mind,” and carefully preserved them. Moment of Life,” Nichiren states: “If votaries of the Lotus Sutra carry out

2. In “How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood religious practice as the sutra directs, then every one of them without

through the Lotus Sutra,” Nichiren writes: “When we revere Myoho-renge- exception will surely attain Buddhahood within his or her present lifetime.

kyo inherent in our own life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature To cite an analogy, if one plants the fields in spring and summer, then,

within us is summoned forth and manifested by our chanting of Nam- whether it be early or late, one is certain to reap a harvest within the year.

myoho-renge-kyo. This is what is meant by ‘Buddha.’ To illustrate, when a Votaries of the Lotus Sutra fall into three categories, superior, middling,

caged bird sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby summoned inferior, depending upon their capacities, and yet all will invariably attain

and gather around, and when the birds flying in the sky gather around, the enlightenment within a single lifetime” (WND-2, 88).

bird in the cage strives to get out. When with our mouths we chant the 6. For SGI President Ikeda’s detailed discussion of this passage, see the

Mystic Law, our Buddha nature, being summoned, will invariably emerge” December 2004 Living Buddhism, p. 25.

(WND-1, 887). 7. The doctrine of annihilation is the mistaken attachment to the notion that

3. In “Devadatta,” the twelfth chapter of the Lotus Sutra, the eight-year-old life begins with birth and ends with death. According to this view, there is

daughter of the dragon king Sagara conceives the desire for enlightenment only the present life, and death represents a complete cessation of existence

when she hears Bodhisattva Manjushri preach the Lotus Sutra. She comes both physical and spiritual. The doctrine of eternity is also the mistaken

to offers a jewel to Shakyamuni and instantaneously perfects the bodhi- notion that what exists here in the present is permanent and unchanging.

sattva practice. She then appears in a land to the south called Spotless This view rejects causality, so that neither practicing good nor practicing

World and manifests the state of Buddhahood without changing her evil produces any change in one’s condition.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Key Points A Humanistic,

People-centered Religion

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Nichiren had deep insight into the potential of

human beings, discerning that they could free them-

in Terms of Faith and Practice

selves from a cycle of negative transmigration and

In Nichiren Buddhism, chanting Nam-myoho-

realize a positive one through profound inner

renge-kyo has two aspects: the chanting of Nam- change. And he set forth a practical way to enable all

myoho-renge-kyo in terms of faith and chanting in people to achieve this. Consequently, there is no

terms of practice. Chanting in terms of faith refers other teaching that can more deservedly be called

to the spiritual aspect of our practice. This essen- humanistic than Nichiren Buddhism. In “The True

tially consists of the struggle we wage in our hearts Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren writes:

against our inner delusion or darkness—a battle “Though it is thought that Shakyamuni Buddha

against the negative and destructive forces within possesses the three virtues of sovereign, teacher, and

us. It means that through the power of faith—in parent for the sake of all of us living beings, that is

other words, through strengthening our conviction not so. On the contrary, it is common mortals who

that we possess the Buddha nature—we can break endow him with the three virtues” (WND-1, 384).

through the darkness obscuring this awareness, This passage describes a shift from an authoritarian

thus revealing the life-state of Buddhahood. Chant- to a humanistic, people-centered religion. The

ing in terms of practice, meanwhile, refers to teaching of Nichiren, who established the concrete

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ourselves and means for achieving enlightenment in this lifetime,

also teaching it to others. It means making efforts in makes this shift possible. (p. 7) word and deed for our own and others’ happiness

in the course of our spiritual struggle against inner The Fundamental Purpose of Our Lives

negativity and illusion. (p. 3) Only by winning over our inner darkness and neg-

ativity can we be victorious in life and reveal our

The Heart Is Most Important full potential. The same is true if we wish to savor

true fulfillment. Allow me to emphasize, then, that

The human heart is sensitive, multifaceted and rich;

the Nichiren Buddhist practice toward attaining

it has the capacity for magnificent achievement. For

Buddhahood in this lifetime is the only means to

that very reason, the heart often undergoes great

conquer the darkness and delusion that are the

suffering and torment, and can become trapped in

fundamental source of human evil, and cultivate

an endless, downward spiral. Will we transmigrate

true independence. It allows us to construct a solid

forever along the paths of evil, or can we succeed in

self, and achieve a state of life of boundless happi-

directing our lives into an orbit of good? As evi-

ness and peace of mind. Attaining Buddhahood in

denced in many of his writings, Nichiren repeatedly this lifetime thus becomes the fundamental pur-

stresses the crucial importance of the heart, or pose of an individual’s life. (p. 8) mind. In this inner realm of life, the potential resides

for dramatic shifts from evil to good or from good Changing the Destiny of All Humanity

to evil. That is why Nichiren’s teaching of enlighten-

The only way for human beings to change is for

ment can be viewed as a process that begins with

them to conquer their inner darkness and redis-

inner change. In other words, through the power of

cover the eternal dignity within their own lives.

faith, we can defeat the negative functions inside us

Cultivating the noble spirit with which all people

that are governed by the fundamental darkness in all

are originally endowed will directly lead to a change

human hearts and manifest the positive functions

in the destiny of humankind. With that conviction,

of life that are one with the Dharma nature—our

we of the SGI have been working to build a network

Buddhahood. (p. 5)

of good all around the globe. (p. 9)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime

[Chapter 2]

The Significance of Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—

Achieving a Life of Supreme Victory Through Correct Buddhist Practice

The practice of chanting Nam-myoho- truth innate in all life” (The Writings of Nichiren renge-kyo contains immeasurable benefit, Daishonin , vol. 1, p. 3). for it enables us to summon forth in our This passage encapsulates the profound prin-own lives the limitless power of the Mystic Law, ciples of Buddhism and the religious revolution the fundamental law of the universe. to bring about the enlightenment of all people

Nichiren Daishonin actualized happiness for that was begun by Shakyamuni Buddha and com-all humankind through the boundless beneficial pleted by Nichiren. Each word and phrase is power of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The doctrinal infused with the sublime wisdom of Buddhism. basis for this endeavor is set forth with great sim- “To free oneself from the sufferings of birth plicity and conciseness in the opening passage of and death endured since time without beginning”

“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime”: “If relates to the fundamental questions of human you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of existence and the original purpose of religion. “To birth and death you have endured since time attain unsurpassed enlightenment” constitutes without beginning and to attain without fail the profound Buddhist response to these ques-unsurpassed enlightenment in this lifetime, you tions. “To perceive the mystic truth inherent in all must perceive the mystic truth that is originally living beings” is this response further refined and inherent in all living beings. This truth is deepened based on the philosophy of the Lotus Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting Myoho-renge-kyo Sutra. And “chanting Myoho-renge-kyo” refers to will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic the practice established by Nichiren to enable all

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

people to translate this Buddhist wisdom into than two millennia, and the compassion and action. The realization of this practice is the fruit wisdom for leading all people to enlightenment

of great compassion that aspires for the happiness found in Nichiren Buddhism. of all people, and indicates the truly revolutionary The purpose of this installment is to confirm

nature of Nichiren Buddhism. that Nichiren’s practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

Through this passage as a whole, it becomes renge-kyo represents the ultimate form of correct

clear that the practice of chanting Nam-myoho- Buddhist practice, and that its establishment renge-kyo established by Nichiren is the correct marks the start of a genuinely people-centered

and supreme Buddhist practice. Indeed, the short Buddhism that makes it possible for all opening passage succinctly articulates the pro- humankind to achieve the same enlightened state found insights of Buddhism distilled over more as the Buddha.

Attaining a State of Eternal Happiness

If you wish to free yourself from the sufferings of birth and death you have

endured since time without beginning and to attain without fail unsurpassed

enlightenment in this lifetime, you must perceive the mystic truth that is orig-

inally inherent in all living beings. This truth is Myoho-renge-kyo. Chanting

Myoho-renge-kyo will therefore enable you to grasp the mystic truth innate in

all life. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3)

Let us start by considering the profound Nichiren Daishonin’s reference to “the suffer-meaning of the opening phrase, “If you ings of birth and death endured since time wish to free yourself from the sufferings of without beginning” is premised on the concept of birth and death you have endured since time transmigration, according to which living beings without beginning . . . ” undergo an unceasing, suffering-filled cycle of

birth and death that continues from the infinite The Mystic Truth Embraces past into the infinite future. Buddhism holds that and Is Inherent in All Things this never-ending round of suffering ultimately

arises from earthly desires, and that a negative In this passage, to “perceive the mystic truth that is cycle of earthly desires, karma and suffering is originally inherent in all living beings” means to part and parcel of transmigration. In this sense, “attain unsurpassed enlightenment.” The wisdom “the sufferings of birth and death endured since to apprehend this universally inherent truth repre-time without beginning” also represents an inter- sents the supreme enlightenment of the Buddha. minable succession of illusion and suffering. The point where Buddhism radically departs

Because the thought of such endless transmi- from many other philosophies and religions is gration is ultimately unbearable, people naturally that it uncovered within the individual’s own life came to wish for a way to put an end to this the Law, or limitless inner power, for resolving all painful cycle and free themselves from the chains suffering on the most essential level. A Buddha is of delusion and suffering. one who, based on this Law, has attained the ulti-

In Buddhism, there are two basic approaches to mate wisdom to fundamentally put an end to liberation from the suffering of this cycle. One suffering and construct indestructible happiness. view holds that people can free themselves from Buddhism is a teaching of unparalleled the endless karmic cycle of birth and death by humanism that stresses the boundless potential eradicating earthly desires believed to cause it. The within human beings. That’s why it is called the other is the Mahayana approach, in which the “internal way.” essence of life that undergoes transmigration is not To “perceive the mystic truth that is originally viewed as a transient, impermanent phenomenon. inherent in all living beings” is to “attain unsur-

The Mahayana teachings, for example, espouse passed enlightenment”; it is the sole means for the concept of undergoing the cycle of birth and freeing oneself from “the sufferings of birth and death in accordance with the bodhisattva vow to death endured since time without beginning.” guide living beings to enlightenment; or they view This is Shakyamuni’s starting point, and the the oscillation between birth and death as a cycle entirety of Buddhist thought. The scripture that of emerging from and returning to the funda- proclaims this philosophy of the “internal way” is mental, all-embracing life of the universe. The the Lotus Sutra, which teaches that all people can latter view can be easily understood using the attain enlightenment. The Lotus Sutra could be metaphor of waves on the ocean: birth is like a said to embody the ultimate principle of respect wave appearing on the surface of the ocean—the for human dignity. life of the universe—while death is the wave sub- In this writing, Nichiren Daishonin says that merging back into that ocean. Gaining such an the “mystic truth that is originally inherent in all understanding of the essence of our own lives, living beings” is the “principle of the mutually which repeat the cycle of birth and death, is to inclusive relationship of a single moment of life attain “unsurpassed enlightenment,” the highest and all phenomena.” This latter principle refers to awakening of the Buddha. the inscrutable relationship that exists between

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

ourselves—our minds or each life-moment—and could give it the most appropriate name (see

the universe; its meaning is that all phenomena WND-1, 421).2 Naming something is a creative are contained in one’s life and that one’s life process. Giving a name that accurately grasps the

pervades all phenomena. This principle no essence of a thing has the important effect of doubt corresponds in meaning to the “principle making that essence available to all people; it

of inherence and pervasion”1 articulated by enables all people to share in its value. Nichikan, an early eighteenth-century restorer In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life-

of Nichiren Buddhism, in describing the doc- time,” as indicated by the passage “the mystic

trine of “three thousand realms in a single truth that is originally inherent in all living beings

moment of life.” is Myoho-renge-kyo,” Nichiren states that this

The cosmic life enfolds and pervades every- mystic truth that constitutes the fundamental

thing, and because it does so, it is also inherent in Law of the universe is none other than Myoho-

all things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our renge-kyo. Strictly speaking, the term Myoho-individual lives lies at the heart of the “principle renge-kyo existed prior to this as the title of the of the mutually inclusive relationship of a single Lotus Sutra, but Nichiren was the first to identify

moment of life and all phenomena.” To awaken to Myoho-renge-kyo as being the name of the prin-

this mystic truth is to attain the Buddha’s “unsur- ciple of the “true aspect of all phenomena,”3

passed enlightenment.” which the Lotus Sutra teaches is the profound

wisdom of all Buddhas. Also, although the “Life

Span” chapter of the Lotus Sutra expounds the

Naming the Mystic Truth life of the eternal Buddha from the standpoint of

Shakyamuni, it was Nichiren who first revealed

The question is how to enable all people to per- that the essence of the Buddha’s eternal life—the

ceive this “mystic truth that is originally “heart of the ‘Life Span’ chapter”—is Myoho-

inherent in all living beings.” A widely accessible renge-kyo (see “The Object of Devotion for

Buddhism will not be possible if only a very Observing the Mind,” WND-1, 371). limited number of people can follow the way set The eternal Buddha, since attaining enlighten-

forth for apprehending the mystic truth. Before ment in the remote past, repeatedly undergoes the

Nichiren Daishonin, the Great Teacher T’ien- cycle of birth and death as a Buddha while appear-

t’ai of China tried to establish the means for ing in various forms within the Ten Worlds4 for the perceiving this mystic truth through the prac- salvation of all living beings. The “Life Span” chap-

tice of observing the mind, also known as the ter reveals that living beings of the Ten Worlds

practice of concentration and insight. But it was (including Buddhas), and the phenomena of birth

not a means readily accessible to the people of and death as well, are all manifestations of the great

the Latter Day of the Law. eternal life of the universe. Because Nichiren says

The initial step Nichiren took in opening the that the “heart of the ‘Life Span’ chapter” is Myoho-

great path to universal enlightenment was to renge-kyo, we can infer that Myoho-renge-kyo is

name the mystic truth. The universally inherent the name of the great, eternal, universal life that is

mystic truth originally had no name, but as revealed in the “Life Span” chapter. Nichiren explains in “The Entity of the Mystic Living beings in the nine worlds, repeatedly

Law,” a sage awakened to this truth in his own life undergoing birth and death, also follow the

rhythm of birth and death of emerging from and Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the “mystic truth submerging back into the great eternal life that that is originally inherent in all living beings.” is Myoho-renge-kyo. They are embraced by It was Nichiren who first declared that Myoho-renge-kyo, and at the same time possess Myoho-renge-kyo is to be chanted and spread in Myoho-renge-kyo within them. This is why the Latter Day of the Law.

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo To Perceive the Mystic Truth

and Establish the Buddhism of the People

The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, true and correct in both word and prin-

ciple. Its words are the ultimate reality, and this reality is the Mystic Law

(myoho). It is called the Mystic Law because it reveals the principle of the

mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment of life and all phenomena.

That is why this sutra is the wisdom of all Buddhas.

Life at each moment encompasses the body and mind and the self and

environment of all sentient beings in the Ten Worlds as well as all insentient

beings in the three thousand realms, including plants, sky, earth, and even

the minutest particles of dust. Life at each moment permeates the entire realm

of phenomena and is revealed in all phenomena. To be awakened to this

principle is itself the mutually inclusive relationship of life at each moment

and all phenomena. (WND-1, 3)

Nichiren Daishonin’s next step in opening established the practice of invoking this truth. this great path was to establish the prac-Nam means “to dedicate one’s life.” Chanting tice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo aloud represents a deter-He appended the word nam—a transliteration of mination and vow to dedicate one’s life to the the Sanskrit word namas, meaning “devotion”— realm of truth of Myoho-renge-kyo in thought, to the universal truth of Myoho-renge-kyo, and word and deed.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

At the same time, chanting Nam-myoho- process of establishing a self capable of activating

renge-kyo enables each person to actualize a way and tapping from within the “mystic truth origi-

of life based on the universal truth of Myoho- nally inherent in all living beings.” renge-kyo. The crucial point in chanting Nam- Looking back on the history of Buddhism,

myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism is not even though the Lotus Sutra has taught the

simply intoning the name of an external truth. It awakening to this mystic truth, over time people

constitutes a practice to actually summon forth lost sight of its existence within their own lives.

the inner truth that pervades the universe and our It was in that context that T’ien-t’ai established

own selves and live our lives in accord with that the meditative practice for observing the mind

truth. This practice could be described as a based on the principles of “three thousand

BUDDHISM IN A NEW LIGHT

Eighteen Essays That

Illuminate Our Buddhist Practice

by shin yatomi

This compilation of insightful essays by Shin Yatomi

explores topics such as the meaning of freedom and

the difference between arrogance and confidence,

each essay clarifying the meaning of faith and

practice for Nichiren Buddhists. By applying the

humanistic teachings that are reiterated in this small

book, you will learn of the unconditional value of all

life, and what love is and what it is not. You will be

encouraged to develop an authentic Buddhist sense

of peace and justice.

Paperback • 179 pages • 5"x7" Available at your local SGI-USA

Price $3.95 • SKU #4150 bookstore or from:

(800) 626-1313 • bookstore.sgi-usa.org

realms in a single moment of life” and the “mutu- that highest state of life. The wisdom and com-ally inclusive relationship of a single moment of passion of a Buddha that emerges through life and all phenomena.” He thereby sought to chanting enriches our life-condition, and brings enable people to summon forth the world of happiness to ourselves and others. Further, as Buddhahood. T’ien-t’ai’s meditation of observ- more and more people come to chant Nam-ing the mind could be viewed as an appropriate myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves practice that restored the correct path of the and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance Lotus Sutra. of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha

Further, in order to enable all people to and to ultimately transform even the destiny of perceive and actualize the “mystic truth originally humankind. inherent in all living beings,” Nichiren gave it the

name Myoho-renge-kyo and established the prac-

tice of invoking that name—the practice of Salute to the Rise of the chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. By doing so, he Buddhism of the Sun opened the way for all people to dedicate their

lives to and live based on the mystic truth. Another point we should bear in mind regarding

Thus Nichiren established the means by the true meaning of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is which all people can awaken to the truth of life that it is also the name of the life of the Buddha and the universe within their own lives and of the Latter Day, Nichiren Daishonin. Nam-actively manifest that truth. Moreover, this truth myoho-renge-kyo and the life of the original is the enlightened wisdom of all Buddhas and is Buddha are indivisibly connected. We could say revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest that the fundamental truth of Myoho-renge-kyo teaching of Buddhism. By basing ourselves on that pervades life and the universe was only iden-that truth, we can lead lives of supreme value. tified and established for the first time through Nichiren Buddhism made this realm of truth Nichiren himself practicing it and manifesting it accessible to anyone, anywhere, anytime, no mat- in his behavior. He gave concrete expression to ter what his or her background. It would be no the Law that people had not been able to perceive exaggeration to say that the practice of chanting up to that point. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren Buddhism Nichiren’s life as the Buddha of the Latter Day gave rise to a Buddhism of the people. This prac- is a life dedicated to battling evil and vanquishing tice of chanting is indeed the supreme Buddhist ignorance. The struggle to free people from all practice, making it possible for us to fundamen- misfortune and misery in the world—from all tally transform our lives. negative karma and the sufferings of birth, aging,

In other words, to chant Nam-myoho-renge- sickness and death—ultimately entails battling kyo is to summon forth our own innate the fundamental darkness or ignorance that gives Buddhahood.5 It is the direct path to manifesting rise to all evil and suffering.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

As Nichiren indicates when he says that the chants Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, one’s life imme-

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the hap- diately becomes the object of devotion of three

piness of self and others toward the realization thousand realms in a single life-moment. It

of kosen-rufu clears “the clouds of ignorance” becomes the life of Nichiren Daishonin.”6 The

(see “The Doctrine of Three Thousand Realms,” practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is

WND-2, 85), Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly has the supreme path to attaining Buddhahood

the power to dispel life’s darkness. When we through which each person can become a shining

chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the sun of Bud- sun in his or her own right. dhahood rises in our hearts. The ignorance and The great nineteenth-century Russian poet

delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the sun, Aleksandr Pushkin sings: “Before the bright

are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood dawn, even so / Shall flicker and die every

comes to shine within us, the darkness of sophistry jaded / At reason’s unperishing spark. / ignorance vanishes. Salute to the sunrise, and vanish the dark!”7

But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching in Nichiren Buddhism is the Buddhism of the

which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a sun that opens the path of life’s supreme victory

teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of

for all humankind. With “Salute to the sunrise!”

Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We

as our rallying cry, let us dynamically advance in

are truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same

the struggle to dispel the darkness of ignorance in

brilliant life-state of Buddhahood as Nichiren.

people’s hearts.

In this regard, Nichikan writes: “When one

embraces and has faith in this Gohonzon and

1. Commenting on T’ien-t’ai’s words, “The three thousand realms exist in life endowed with the potential to become Buddhas, and can tap and manifest

at each moment,” Nichikan writes in his Six-Volume Writings: “The intent this potential.

of [the Lotus Sutra] is to reveal the principle of ‘inherence and pervasion.’ 4. The Ten Worlds are ten distinct realms or categories of beings referred to in

According to this principle, all phenomena inhere in a single moment of Buddhist scriptures. From the lowest to the highest, the realms of (1) hell,

life, and a single moment of life pervades all phenomena.” (2) hungry spirits, (3) animals, (4) asuras, (5) human beings, (6) heavenly

2. Nichiren Daishonin writes: “This passage of commentary means that the beings, (7) voice-hearers, (8) cause-awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and

supreme principle [that is the Mystic Law] was originally without a name. (10) Buddhas. From the standpoint of the Lotus Sutra, the Ten Worlds indi-

When the sage was observing the principle and assigning names to all cates ten potential states or conditions that a person can manifest or

things, he perceived that there is this wonderful single Law [myoho] that experience. Also includes the concept of the nine worlds, which indicates all

simultaneously possesses both cause and effect [renge], and he named it the worlds other than Buddhas.

Myoho-renge. This single Law that is Myoho-renge encompasses within it 5. Nichiren writes: “Therefore, when once we chant Myoho-renge-kyo, with

all the phenomena comprising the Ten Worlds and the three thousand just that single sound we summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of

realms, and is lacking in none of them. Anyone who practices this Law will all Buddhas; all existences; all bodhisattvas; all voice-hearers; all the deities

obtain both the cause and the effect of Buddhahood simultaneously” (“The such as Brahma, Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and the myriad

Entity of the Mystic Law,” WND-1, 421). stars; the heavenly gods and earthly deities, on down to hell-dwellers,

3. True aspect of all phenomena: The ultimate truth or reality that permeates hungry spirits, animals, asuras, human and heavenly beings, and all other

all phenomena and is in no way separate from them. A principle expressed living beings. This blessing is immeasurable and boundless” (“How Those

in “Expedient Means,” the second chapter of the Lotus Sutra. In the writ- Initially Aspiring to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Lotus

ing titled “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren defined “all Sutra,” WND-1, 887).

phenomena” as all living beings and their environments in the Ten Worlds, 6. Commentary on the “The Object of Devotion for Observing the Mind,” in

and “the true aspect” as the Law of Myoho-renge-kyo, the ultimate reality Nichikan Shonin mondanshu (The Commentaries of Nichikan Shonin)

permeating all living beings and their environments in any of the Ten (Tokyo: Seikyo Shimbunsha, 1980), p. 548.

Worlds. All phenomena, he stated, are manifestations of this universal Law; 7. Aleksandr Pushkin, Pushkin Threefold: Narrative, Lyric, Polemic, and Ribald

phenomena and the ultimate truth are inseparable and non-dual. The Verse, translated by Walter Arndt (New York: E. P. Dutton and Co., Inc.,

“Expedient Means” chapter clarifies the truth that all people are inherently 1972), p. 20.

Key Points wisdom of all Buddhas and is revealed in the Lotus Sutra, which is the highest teaching of Buddhism.

By basing ourselves on that truth, we can lead lives

Uncovering People’s Inner Potential

of supreme value. Nichiren Buddhism made this

The point where Buddhism radically departs from

realm of truth accessible to anyone, anywhere, any-

many other philosophies and religions is that it

time, no matter what his or her background. It

uncovered within the individual’s own life the Law,

would be no exaggeration to say that the practice

or limitless inner power, for resolving all suffering

of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren

on the most essential level. A Buddha is one who,

Buddhism gave rise to a Buddhism of the people.

based on this Law, has attained the ultimate wis-

This practice of chanting is indeed the supreme

dom to fundamentally put an end to suffering and

Buddhist practice, making it possible for us to fun-

construct indestructible happiness. Buddhism is a

damentally transform our lives. (p. 17)

teaching of unparalleled humanism that stresses

the boundless potential within human beings. The Direct Path to That’s why it is called the “internal way.” (p. 13)

Manifesting Buddhahood

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to summon

The Mystic Truth of Life

forth our own innate Buddhahood. It is the direct

and the Universe path to manifesting that highest state of life. The

The cosmic life enfolds and pervades everything, wisdom and compassion of a Buddha that emerges

and because it does so, it is also inherent in all through chanting enriches our life-condition, and

things. The oneness of the cosmic life and our indi- brings happiness to ourselves and others. Further,

vidual lives lies at the heart of the “principle of the as more and more people come to chant Nam-

mutually inclusive relationship of a single moment myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of themselves

of life and all phenomena.” To awaken to this mys- and others, it will be possible to forge an alliance

tic truth is to attain the Buddha’s “unsurpassed of people filled with the compassion of a Buddha

enlightenment.” (p. 14) and to ultimately transform even the destiny of

humankind. (p. 17)

The Meaning of Chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Causing the Sun of

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables each per- Buddhahood To Rise Within son to actualize a way of life based on the universal As Nichiren indicates when he says that the Nam-

truth of Myoho-renge-kyo. The crucial point in myoho-renge-kyo he chants for the happiness of self

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in Nichiren and others toward the realization of kosen-rufu

Buddhism is not simply intoning the name of an clears “the clouds of ignorance” (see “The Doctrine

external truth. It constitutes a practice to actually of the Three Thousand Realms,” WND-2, 85), Nam-

summon forth the inner truth that pervades the myoho-renge-kyo truly has the power to dispel life’s

universe and our own selves and live our lives in darkness. When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

accord with that truth. This practice could be the sun of Buddhahood rises in our hearts. The igno-

described as a process of establishing a self capable rance and delusion, like heavy clouds shrouding the

of activating and tapping from within the “mystic sun, are swept away. When the sun of Buddhahood

truth originally inherent in all living beings.” (p. 16) comes to shine within us, the darkness of ignorance

vanishes. But Nichiren Buddhism is not a teaching

Establishing a Buddhism of the People in which Nichiren alone shines like the sun. It is a

Nichiren established the means by which all people teaching in which all of us can bring the sun of

can awaken to the truth of life and the universe Buddhahood to rise in our lives just as he did. We are

within their own lives and actively manifest that truly fortunate in that we can manifest the same bril-

truth. Moreover, this truth is the enlightened liant life-state of Buddhahood as Nichiren. (p. 18)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime

[Chapter 3]

“If You Think the Law Is Outside Yourself,

You Are Not Embracing the Mystic Law”

Even though you chant and believe in Myoho-renge-kyo, if you think the Law

is outside yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an inferior

teaching. “Inferior teaching” means those [Buddhist teachings] other than this

[Lotus] sutra, which are all expedient and provisional. No expedient or provi-

sional teaching leads directly to enlightenment, and without the direct path to

enlightenment you cannot attain Buddhahood, even if you practice lifetime

after lifetime for countless kalpas. Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime is

then impossible. Therefore, when you chant myoho and recite renge,1 you must

summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life itself. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 3)

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to com- vanquish this darkness of illusion and ignorance mune with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist and become one with the Mystic Law, its infinite practice for fusing our lives with this Law. power unfolds in our lives. Such is the immeasur-

At the same time, it is a battle to conquer the able benefit of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

inner darkness that prevents this fusion from tak- The essence of this practice established and

ing place. When, through our practice of faith, we propagated by Nichiren Daishonin is to chant

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo filled with a seeking enlightenment.4 The power of chanting Nam-spirit to continually develop our faith or confi- myoho-renge-kyo enables us to actualize cause dence in its power. “It is the heart that is and effect in a single moment of life—that is, important,” Nichiren asserts (“The Strategy of the faith (cause) leading to the manifestation of our Lotus Sutra,” WND-1, 1000). When it comes to Buddhahood (effect). chanting, therefore, we should above all strive to Considered in this light, one’s voice chanting summon forth the courage with which to over- Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the voice of unshak-come illusion without being defeated by the able faith and seeking spirit that breaks through “three obstacles and four devils.”2 the inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and

Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the ultimate sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is mystic truth, and Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the also the courageous lion’s roar that issues forth name of the life-state of Buddhas who embody from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of and reveal this truth. Thus, when we chant Nam- chanting. myoho-renge-kyo with conviction, the infinite The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is benefit of Myoho-renge-kyo unfolds in our lives. not only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is This is what it means to bring forth the world of also the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we Buddhahood. should always try to chant resoundingly, with a

At work here is the principle of “cause and vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop-effect in a single moment of life,”3 in which faith ing horse. is the cause and manifesting the life-state of Bud- It can also be said that the chanting of Nam-dhahood is the effect. When we continue myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which we affirm chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo through times that we ourselves are inherently entities of of both suffering and joy while striving for our Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to own happiness and that of others, we can estab- return to our true, original selves and tap the lish as the core and innermost essence of our lives innate life force that we have possessed from time the benefit of the cause and effect for attaining without beginning. Buddhahood—which are themselves contained Nichiren declares: “There is no true happiness within the practice of chanting. When we do so, for human beings other than chanting Nam-the indomitable state of Buddhahood emerges myoho-renge-kyo” (“Happiness in This World,” within us. This is the meaning of “attaining Bud- WND-1, 681). This happiness, he says, is the dhahood in this lifetime.” “boundless joy of the Law.”5 “Joy of the Law”

In his treatise “The Object of Devotion for describes the unshakable happiness and peace Observing the Mind,” Nichiren states: “Shakya- of mind inherent in all existence. To experience muni Buddha, who has attained perfect this joy means to fully savor and enjoy the infi-enlightenment, is our own flesh and blood. His nite life force that is one with the Mystic Law. practices and the resulting virtues are our bones Nichiren explains that the only way for us to and marrow” (WND-1, 365). He explains that to taste the joy of the Mystic Law is through chant-embrace Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself attaining ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

The Mystic Law and In the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings,

Incomplete Teachings a virtually insurmountable gulf exists between

Buddhas and ordinary people. Only a very few

Given that chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has exceptional practitioners who, after having

such profound meaning, it is crucial to remember undergone austerities for countless kalpas, can

when we chant that Myoho-renge-kyo is our lives even attempt to reach the goal of enlightenment.

themselves. If we lose sight of this point, then no Moreover, according to these teachings, it is

matter how much we may chant, we will have inconceivable for someone who has become a

departed from the practice of chanting taught by Buddha to go back to being an ordinary person.

Nichiren Daishonin. As a rule, according to these teachings, the world

Therefore, in “On Attaining Buddhahood in where Buddhas dwell is not this strife-filled saha

This Lifetime,” Nichiren writes in stern warning, world where ordinary people reside. Buddhas and

“Even though you chant and believe in Myoho- ordinary people are completely separate. There-

renge-kyo, if you think the Law is outside yourself, fore, as long as that divide exists between the

you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an infe- world of Buddhahood and the nine worlds (the

rior teaching” (WND-1, 3). “Inferior” here means realm of ordinary beings), it naturally follows

“incomplete.” The Mystic Law is the ultimate truth that there is no way for all people to attain

that is perfect and complete; in contrast, an incom- enlightenment. In this worldview, ordinary peo-

plete teaching sets forth only a partial truth. ple and the idealized Buddhas are poles apart,

The above passage contains a profound phi- thus leaving ordinary people with no option but

losophy that overcomes one of the serious pitfalls to aspire for salvation through the assistance or

to which religion tends to succumb. It also intervention of such Buddhas. embodies a crucial philosophy of faith for attain- This perceived separation between the nine

ing genuine happiness. worlds and the world of Buddhahood7 is demol-

Religion is generally held to be a universal ished by the Lotus Sutra doctrine of “three

endeavor to connect the human being to the infi- thousand realms in a single moment of life”—

nite, absolute and sacred. While in a sense this may in other words, the teaching that “the nine

be true, it seems that many religions postulate worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and

from the outset a separation between the secular that Buddhahood retains the nine worlds”

and the sacred, and between human beings and (“The Selection of the Time,” WND-1, 539).8

gods or Buddhas, and thus seek to bridge that gap. Here we can see the immense importance of the

Nichiren, however, regards teachings that view Lotus Sutra principle of the “mutual possession

the absolute or sacred as separate from human of the Ten Worlds.” beings as incomplete. And he cites as an example Nichiren opened the way to actualizing this

the provisional, pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, which latter principle, which is the key to attaining Bud-

do not set forth the principles or practices that dhahood in this lifetime, by establishing the

enable ordinary people to attain Buddhahood in practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This

this lifetime. Rather, they espouse that one must constitutes in its fullest and most complete form

first undergo innumerable kalpas 6 of austere the teaching of Buddhism that seeks enlighten-

practice before enlightenment can be achieved. ment for all human beings.

SGI President Ikeda with

Brazilian Association of

ress Municipalities President

P

o José do Carmo Garcia,

Seiky Tokyo, July 20, 2006.

Summoning Forth and Manifesting Brahma, Shakra, and the other deities; the Bud-

the Buddha Nature dha nature of Shariputra, Maudgalyayana, and

the other voice-hearers; the Buddha nature of

The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the Manjushri, Maitreya, and the other bodhisattvas;

universe. Its universality transcends our individ- and the Mystic Law that is the enlightenment of

ual selves. As indicated by its description as the the Buddhas of the three existences, are one and

“mystic truth that is originally inherent in all liv- identical. This principle is called Myoho-renge-

ing beings,” however, the Mystic Law also exists kyo” (WND-1, 887). within our lives (“On Attaining Buddhahood in Not only is Myoho-renge-kyo our own Bud-

This Lifetime,” WND-1, 3). It both resides within dha nature, he says, but it is also the Buddha

us and transcends us. Put another way, the Mystic nature of all heavenly deities, voice-hearers,

Law is inherent in our lives because it is the all- bodhisattvas and so on. Moreover, this Buddha

embracing Law that pervades everything in the nature is identical to the Mystic Law to which the

universe. Buddhas of the three existences—past, present

In his writing “How Those Initially Aspiring and future—are enlightened. to the Way Can Attain Buddhahood through the Nichiren then goes on to explain that the

Lotus Sutra,” Nichiren explains the essence of chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a practice

Myoho-renge-kyo as follows: “As for the meaning in which we “summon forth and manifest” the

of Myoho-renge-kyo: The Buddha nature inher- Buddha nature inherent in the lives of all beings of

ent in us, ordinary people; the Buddha nature of the Ten Worlds: “Therefore, when once we chant

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Myoho-renge-kyo, with just that single sound we bodhisattvas throughout the universe manifest,

summon forth and manifest the Buddha nature of but those chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can

all Buddhas; all existences; all bodhisattvas; all also sever the chains of fundamental darkness

voice-hearers; all the deities such as Brahma, and illusion, and reveal their own Buddha nature.

Shakra, and King Yama; the sun and moon, and In other words, it is the power of our voices

the myriad stars; the heavenly gods and earthly chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo that connects

deities, on down to hell-dwellers, hungry spirits, our lives with the Mystic Law pervading all phe-

animals, asuras, human and heavenly beings, and nomena of the three thousand realms.9 all other living beings. This blessing is immeasur- In “Letter to Niike,” Nichiren further explains

able and boundless” (WND-1, 887). the significance of chanting through the analogy

Regarding the meaning of chanting Nam- of a mother bird and an egg.10 He says that the myoho-renge-kyo, he further states: “When we chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is “like the

revere Myoho-renge-kyo inherent in our own warmth of the mother bird” (WND-1, 1030). At

life as the object of devotion, the Buddha nature first there is nothing inside the egg but liquid, but

within us is summoned forth and manifested by as a result of being warmed by the mother bird,

our chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. This is the beak, eyes and feathers are formed. Eventually,

what is meant by ‘Buddha’” (WND-1, 887). The the baby bird breaks through the shell and hatches,

expression “is summoned forth and manifested” and is soon flying into the sky like its mother. In

points to the profound significance of the this analogy, the substance within the egg repre-Mystic Law. sents the Buddha nature of living beings, while

Nichiren uses a wonderful metaphor to the mother bird represents the Buddha who leads

explain this principle of calling forth and reveal- others to enlightenment. The chanting of Nam-

ing the inner Buddha nature: “When a caged bird myoho-renge-kyo is at once the voice of faith of

sings, birds who are flying in the sky are thereby ordinary people and a function of the life-state of

summoned and gather around, and when the Buddhahood. birds flying in the sky gather around, the bird in Nichiren’s most important admonition in

the cage strives to get out” (WND-1, 887). regard to attaining enlightenment through chant-

The singing of the caged bird refers to the ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that we must not

chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo by ordinary view the Law as something outside ourselves. If

people who, shackled in the chains of fundamen- we think the Law exists externally, then we are

tal darkness and earthly desires, arouse faith in reverting to the kind of divide between Buddhas

the Mystic Law. In other words, it is the chanting and ordinary people found in the pre-Lotus Sutra

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith, which is teachings. expressed as the determination to win over all

obstacles and become happy without fail through

the power of the Mystic Law. Perceiving That One’s Own Life

The power of such strong, determined chant- Is Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ing calls forth the Buddha nature in all living

beings. Not only does the Buddha nature of The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo has Brahma and Shakra and of the Buddhas and immeasurable beneficial power. Josei Toda, the

second Soka Gakkai president, described the infi- means firmly believing that your life is nothing nite power of the Mystic Law as follows: “It is like apart from Nam-myoho-renge-kyo!” This is the lying sprawled on your back in a wide-open space spirit Nichiren teaches in the passage, “When you looking up at the sky. All that you wish for imme- chant myoho and recite renge, you must summon diately appears. No matter how much you may up deep faith that Myoho-renge-kyo is your life give away, there is always more. It is never itself ” (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Life-exhausted. Try and see if you can attain this state time,” WND-1, 3). of life.”

Indeed, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo can be likened

to a “wish-granting jewel.” How can we develop the A Universal Religion for the boundless state of life that enables us to bring forth Happiness of All Humankind whatever strength is necessary? President Toda

often used to say, “If you really want to achieve such Generally speaking, religions expound some infi-a state of life, you have to fight with every ounce of nite and eternal entity that transcends both human your being for the Lotus Sutra, for kosen-rufu!” beings and the impermanence of this world, using

Such was the vast and untrammeled spirit of such terms as God or law. Different religions regard my mentor: the spirit to strive forever together this infinite and eternal entity variously as a source with the Buddhas of the three existences and with of fear and awe, an object of adoration, a great void the life-affirming functions of the universe such of emptiness or a wellspring of all-embracing love. as Brahma and Shakra, wherever in the universe Nichiren Daishonin saw the power of the we might find ourselves; the spirit to actualize a Mystic Law that encompasses and sustains all world of happiness and peace dedicated to value things in the universe as existing within human creation, by helping people overcome misery and beings, and he established a means for actually misfortune and the sufferings of birth, aging, manifesting that Law in their lives. sickness and death. During my second lecture at Harvard Univer-

Throughout everything, Mr. Toda steadfastly sity (in September 1993), I proposed three areas continued to seek the Law that exists nowhere where Mahayana Buddhism could contribute to but within our own lives. And he stressed the modern civilization: (1) in fostering the creation importance of living true to oneself. His starting of peace; (2) in paving the way toward the restora-point was his profound realization in prison that tion and rejuvenation of humanity; and (3) in the Buddha is life itself and his awakening to his providing a philosophical basis for the symbiotic identity as a Bodhisattva of the Earth. coexistence of all things. In connection with the

He also often spoke of the spirit of faith second point, I stressed the important significance we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law with- of the approach of Nichiren Buddhism, which in us, saying: “You have to be resolved that teaches neither an exclusive reliance on the “power Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is your own life!” or of self ” nor on the “power of other.” This perspec-“Propagating the Mystic Law in the Latter Day tive has resonated deeply with many scholars.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Only by communing and fusing with the neither exclusively on the power of other nor on

power of other—which is eternal and transcends the power of self, we can manifest the power that

our limited, finite selves—can we wholly activate exists within us yet transcends our selves. Chant-

the power of self. At the same time, however, this ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo enables us to do this.

eternal, all-encompassing power of other actually In this way, Nichiren Buddhism opens up a

exists inherently in our lives. Nichiren writes:

broad new vision of a universal religion for the

“People are certainly self-empowered, and yet

happiness of all humankind—one that tran-

they are not self-empowered . . . People are cer-

tainly other-empowered, and yet they are not scends the approach of teachings that strictly

other-empowered” (“The Meaning of the Sacred divide external power and the individual’s own

Teachings of the Buddha’s Lifetime,” WND-2, power and that emphasize one over the other.

62). 11 What this means, I believe, is that by relying

1. “Chant myoho and recite renge” means chanting the daimoku, or making it possible to interpret them as potential states of life inher-

name or title, of the Mystic Law—Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. ent in each individual being.

2. Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that 8. “The nine worlds have the potential for Buddhahood and Buddha-

appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. hood retains the nine worlds”: This means that that the lives of

3. Cause and effect in a single moment of life: This principle teaches beings in the nine worlds—the worlds from hell through to bodhi-

that the cause and effect of attaining Buddhahood exist in the lives sattva—are endowed with the world of Buddhahood, and that the

of all people at each moment. Faith and practice based on the Mys- lives of Buddhas are also endowed with the nine worlds. In other

tic Law are the causes that instantly enable us to attain Buddhahood words, ordinary people and Buddhas are essentially the same with

and manifest the virtues of the world of Buddhahood inherent in no distinction between them.

our lives. 9. Three thousand realms in a single moment of life is a philosophical

4. Embracing Myoho-renge-kyo is in itself enlightenment: The Mys- system established by T’ien-t’ai. The “three thousand realms” indi-

tic Law is the fundamental Law by which all Buddhas throughout cates the varying aspects and phases that life assumes at each

past, present and future attain enlightenment. Nichiren perceived moment. At each moment, life manifests one of the Ten Worlds.

the Mystic Law in his own life and manifested it in the concrete Each of these worlds possesses the potential for all ten within itself,

form of the Gohonzon, the object of fundamental devotion. thus making one hundred possible worlds. Each of these hundred

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith in this Gohonzon worlds possesses the ten factors and operates within each of the

constitutes the practice of observing one’s mind in order to attain three realms of existence, thus making three thousand realms.

Buddhahood by perceiving the Mystic Law within one’s own life. 10.Nichiren Daishonin writes: “A bird’s egg contains nothing but liq-

This is the principle of “embracing the Gohonzon is in itself uid, yet by itself this develops into a beak, two eyes, and all the

attaining enlightenment.” other parts, and the bird soars into the sky. We, too, are the eggs of

5. Boundless joy of the Law: This refers to the benefit one obtains from ignorance, which are pitiful things, but when nurtured by the

embracing the Mystic Law. It describes the enlightened state of a chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, which is like the warmth of

Buddha. In his writing “Happiness in This World,” Nichiren states: the mother bird, we develop the beak of the thirty-two features

“There is no true happiness for human beings other than chanting and the feathers of the eighty characteristics [of the Buddha] and

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. The [Lotus] sutra reads, ‘…where living are free to soar into the sky of the true aspect of all phenomena

beings enjoy themselves at ease’ [The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and the reality of all things” (“Letter to Niike,” WND-1, 1030).

and Closing Sutras, p. 272]. How could this passage mean anything 11.Nichiren Daishonin states: “Now in the teachings of the Lotus

but the boundless joy of the Law?” (WND-1, 681). Sutra, people are certainly self-empowered, and yet they are not

6. An extremely long period of time. Sutras and treatises differ in their self-empowered. This is because one’s own self, or life, at the same

definitions, but kalpas fall into two major categories, those of meas- time possesses the nature of all living beings in the Ten Worlds.

urable and immeasurable duration. One explanation sets the length Therefore this self has from the beginning been in the possession of

of a small kalpa at approximately sixteen million years. According one’s own realm of Buddhahood and of the realms of Buddhahood

to Buddhist cosmology, a world repeatedly undergoes four stages: possessed by all other living beings. Therefore when one attains

formation, continuance, decline and disintegration. Each of these Buddhahood one does not take on some new or ‘other’ Buddha

four stages lasts for twenty small kalpas and is equal to one medium identity.

kalpa. Finally, one complete cycle forms a major kalpa. “Again, in the teachings of the Lotus Sutra, people are certainly

7. The Ten Worlds are ten distinct realms or categories of beings other-empowered, and yet they are not other-empowered. The

referred to in Buddhist scriptures. From the lowest to the highest, Buddhas, who are considered separate from us, are actually con-

the realms of (1) hell, (2) hungry spirits, (3) animals, (4) asuras, (5) tained within our own selves, or the lives of us ordinary people.

human beings, (6) heavenly beings, (7) voice-hearers, (8) cause- Those Buddhas manifest the realms of Buddhahood of all living

awakened ones, (9) bodhisattvas and (10) Buddhas. The Lotus beings in the same manner as we do” (“The Sacred Teachings of the

Sutra teaches that each of the Ten Worlds contains all ten within it, Buddha’s Lifetime,” WND-2, 62).

Key Points Bridging the Gap Between

Buddhas and Ordinary People

This perceived separation between the nine worlds

and the world of Buddhahood is demolished by

The Meaning of Chanting the Lotus Sutra doctrine of “three thousand realms

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo in a single moment of life”—in other words, the

To chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is to commune teaching that “the nine worlds have the potential

with the Mystic Law. It is a Buddhist practice for for Buddhahood and that Buddhahood retains the

fusing our lives with this Law. At the same time, it nine worlds” (“The Selection of the Time,” WND-1,

is a battle to conquer the inner darkness that pre- 539). Here we can see the immense importance of

vents this fusion from taking place. When, through the Lotus Sutra principle of the “mutual possession

our practice of faith, we vanquish this darkness of of the Ten Worlds.” Nichiren opened the way to

illusion and ignorance and become one with the actualizing this latter principle, which is the key to

Mystic Law, its infinite power unfolds in our lives. attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, by estab-

Such is the immeasurable benefit of chanting lishing the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. (p. 20) renge-kyo. This constitutes in its fullest and most

complete form the teaching of Buddhism that

The Cause and Effect of seeks enlightenment for all human beings. (p. 22)

Attaining Buddhahood

The power of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Manifesting Our Inner Power enables us to actualize cause and effect in a single That Transcends Us

moment of life—that is, faith (cause) leading to The Mystic Law is the fundamental law of the uni-

the manifestation of our Buddhahood (effect). verse. Its universality transcends our individual

Considered in this light, one’s voice chanting selves. As indicated by its description as the “mystic

Nam-myoho- renge-kyo is the voice of unshakable truth that is originally inherent in all living beings,”

faith and seeking spirit that breaks through the however, the Mystic Law also exists within our lives

inner darkness of ignorance and illusion, and (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,”

sweeps away obstacles and devilish functions. It is WND-1, 3). It both resides within us and transcends

also the courageous lion’s roar that issues forth us. Put another way, the Mystic Law is inherent in

from the Buddhahood one reveals as a result of our lives because it is the all-embracing Law that

chanting. (p. 21) pervades everything in the universe. (p. 23)

Chanting Like a Galloping Horse Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is not Is Your Own Life! only the voice of faith of ordinary people; it is also [Mr. Toda] also often spoke of the spirit of faith we

the voice of Buddhahood. For that reason, we need in order to perceive the Mystic Law within us,

should always try to chant resoundingly, with a saying: “You have to be resolved that Nam-myoho-

vibrant and vigorous rhythm like that of a gallop- renge-kyo is your own life!” or “Propagating the

ing horse. It can also be said that the chanting Mystic Law in the Latter Day means firmly believing

of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is an action by which that your life is nothing apart from Nam-myoho-

we affirm that we ourselves are inherently entities renge-kyo!” This is the spirit Nichiren teaches in the

of Myoho-renge-kyo. It represents a struggle to passage, “When you chant myoho and recite renge, return to our true, original selves and tap the you must summon up deep faith that Myoho-renge-

innate life force that we have possessed from time kyo is your life itself” (“On Attaining Buddhahood in

without beginning. (p. 21) This Lifetime,” WND-1, 3). (p. 25)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime

[Chapter 4]

Transforming Our Fundamental Attitude—

Refusing To Live an “Endless, Painful Austerity”

You must never think that any of the eighty thousand sacred teachings of

Shakyamuni Buddha’s lifetime or any of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the

ten directions and three existences are outside yourself. Your practice of the

Buddhist teachings will not relieve you of the sufferings of birth and death in

the least unless you perceive the true nature of your life. If you seek enlighten-

ment outside yourself, then your performing even ten thousand practices and

ten thousand good deeds will be in vain. It is like the case of a poor man who

spends night and day counting his neighbor’s wealth but gains not even half a

coin. That is why the T’ien-t’ai school’s commentary states, “Unless one per-

ceives the nature of one’s life, one cannot eradicate one’s grave offenses.”1 This

passage implies that, unless one perceives the nature of one’s life, one’s prac-

tice will become an endless, painful austerity. Therefore, such students of

Buddhism are condemned as non-Buddhist. [T’ien-t’ai’s] Great Concentration

and Insight states that, although they study Buddhism, their views are no dif-

ferent from those of non-Buddhists.

Whether you chant the Buddha’s name,2 recite the sutra, or merely offer

flowers and incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits and roots of

goodness in your life. With this conviction, you should strive in faith. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, pp. 3–4)

The character myo of myoho, or “Mystic Needless to say, the Law contained in the prac-Law,” has three meanings: to be fully tice of chanting spread by Nichiren is truly endowed, to open and to revive. 3 These wondrous. But even the power of this wondrous three meanings are all implicit in chanting Nam-Law cannot fully manifest in a life clouded by myoho-renge-kyo. In other words, the chanting ignorance. Ignorance is the inner darkness that of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo contains (1) the myo prevents us from believing in the Mystic Law and of perfect endowment—meaning that the single staying focused on our own Buddha nature and Law of Myoho-renge-kyo encompasses all phe- that of others. The practice of chanting enables us nomena; (2) the myo of transformation that to break through this darkness and vibrantly “opens” the world of Buddhahood in the lives of bring forth our Buddhahood. Battling our funda-beings in the nine worlds (the worlds from hell mental darkness—this inner struggle is the through bodhisattva); and (3) the myo of great essence of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. benefit, whereby a life filled with suffering is

“revived” as a life of great tranquillity and joy.

Our lives themselves are entities of the Mystic Studying Buddhism Yet Succumbing Law. Therefore, they are fully endowed with all to Non-Buddhist Thinking phenomena. Fundamental darkness and the

enlightened Dharma nature,4 earthly desires and In the passage we are studying this time, Nichiren enlightenment, and the nine worlds and the world Daishonin strongly cautions: “You must never of Buddhahood—all of these exist within us. For think that any of the eighty thousand sacred precisely that reason, we can carry out a mystic teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha’s lifetime or any and fundamental inner “revolution”—changing of the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of the ten direc-darkness into light; kindling the flame of enlight- tions and three existences are outside yourself ” enment by “burning the firewood of earthly (WND-1, 3). The use of the word never here is desires” (The Record of the Orally Transmitted deeply significant. This passage explains that the Teachings, p. 11) and thereby manifesting the world entirety of Buddhism is contained within our own of Buddhahood in our lives of the nine worlds. lives. Nichiren concludes that “the eighty thou-

The key to achieving this profound inner sand sacred teachings of Shakyamuni Buddha’s transformation is our hearts—our fundamental lifetime” and “the Buddhas and bodhisattvas of attitude or mind-set. Therefore, Nichiren Dai- 5 the ten directions and three existences” are all shonin warns in “On Attaining Buddhahood in phenomena inherent within us. This Lifetime”: “If you think the Law is outside Nichiren goes on to say that as long as we seek yourself, you are embracing not the Mystic Law enlightenment outside ourselves, even our per-but an inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). When we forming “ten thousand practices and ten diligently exert ourselves in chanting Nam- thousand good deeds” (meaning all of the prac-myoho-renge-kyo based on this admonition, tices expounded in Shakyamuni’s lifetime always remembering that a change in our own teachings) and believing in the protection of the hearts or minds is crucial, the three meanings of Buddhas and bodhisattvas throughout the three myo will clearly manifest themselves in our lives. existences (meaning the benevolent functions of

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

the universe) will be in vain. Doing so is as point- the fundamental cause of the sufferings of birth,

less as counting a neighbor’s wealth, he states, aging, sickness and death—as well as in expound-

because we personally gain nothing from doing so. ing the way for overcoming this ignorance.

Nichiren then cites a passage from a T’ien-t’ai Therefore, as long as we seek the path to

school commentary, which states, “Unless one per- enlightenment outside our own lives, whatever

ceives the nature of one’s life, one cannot eradicate practices and good deeds we carry out will deviate

one’s grave offenses” (WND-1, 3 –4). If we fail to from the true essence of Buddhism. Accordingly,

grasp this point, Nichiren warns, all of the practices Nichiren says: “Such students of Buddhism are

and good deeds we might perform while seeking condemned as non-Buddhist” (WND-1, 4). enlightenment outside ourselves will ultimately

become “an endless, painful austerity” (WND-1, 4).

What does it mean to say that unless we per- To Seek Enlightenment Outside ceive the nature of our lives, we cannot eradicate Our Lives Is To Be Defeated by our grave offenses? “Grave offenses” here can be Fundamental Darkness taken to indicate fundamental darkness, which is

the source of all evil. The grave offense of slan- An important point in this writing is that we as

der—denigrating the Law or the correct teaching Nichiren Buddhists also run the risk of falling

of Buddhism—arises from fundamental darkness into non-Buddhist ways of thinking if we seek the

or ignorance. Law outside of our own lives. Hence, as Nichiren

In T’ien-t’ai’s Buddhism, it is only possible to Daishonin’s disciples, we must always bear in

eradicate this ignorance through the practice of mind his admonition “You must never think that

observing one’s mind—in other words, through any of the [Buddha’s] teachings . . . are outside

wisdom. In Nichiren Buddhism, however, funda- yourself ” (WND-1, 3). mental darkness can be overcome by the sharp The chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a

sword of faith in accord with the principle of practice for revealing the “originally inherent

“substituting faith for wisdom.”6 This is the mystic truth”7 that exists in all people and achiev-essence of the practice of chanting Nam-myoho- ing Buddhahood in this lifetime. It is an

renge-kyo. incomparably “wonderful practice” (OTT, 88), in

To recap, if we seek enlightenment outside of the sense that it represents the means by which all

us, we are not pursuing the path of “observing living beings can gain enlightenment. one’s mind,” which enables us to overcome the If, however, we forget Nichiren’s admonition to

fundamental evil of ignorance or darkness. In never seek the Law outside of us, then no matter

that case, all our efforts and good deeds to attain how hard we practice, we will lose sight of the cor-

enlightenment will be lacking the vital ingredient; rect path to universal enlightenment and effectively

they will be every bit as futile as counting a neigh- wind up practicing a non-Buddhist teaching. That’s

bor’s vast riches. Moreover, because none of these why Nichiren is so strict on this point. efforts will help us eradicate our ignorance, they The essence of our practice is to perceive the

will only become “an endless, painful austerity.” true nature of our lives. To do this we must wage

This battle against ignorance is the heart of an inner struggle. If we allow ourselves to be

Buddhism. It is said that Shakyamuni’s enlighten- defeated by the three obstacles and four devils,8

ment lay in identifying darkness or ignorance as we cannot bring forth our enlightenment. That is

why battling the darkness or ignorance within us to internalize the correct practice of faith as is an unavoidable part of the process of becoming taught by Nichiren Daishonin. a Buddha. In other words, whether we continu- Therefore, those who sincerely chant Nam-ously battle our innate ignorance is the single myoho-renge-kyo to the Gohonzon and practice most important determinant in whether we and participate in activities with the Soka Gakkai attain Buddhahood. As such, it is something we cannot fail to become Buddhas. The purpose of must never forget. faith is to freely realize our full potential and shine

By engaging in this struggle, we can reveal the in our own unique way. That’s why it’s important Buddha wisdom within our lives and thereby to keep advancing and challenging ourselves, to confront and overcome our ignorance. But if we have the spirit “I will exert myself in my practice! I fail to undertake this struggle, ignorance will will deepen my faith! I will do my best as a mem-shroud and conceal our Buddha nature. Igno- ber of the Soka Gakkai.” This is the certain path to rance deepens and exacerbates the five delusive attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. inclinations of greed, anger, foolishness, arro- With this understanding, let’s concretely and gance and doubt within us. That is what happens strictly apply to our daily practice Nichiren’s if we succumb to the erroneous view that the Law admonition “If you think the Law is outside your-is outside ourselves. self, you are embracing not the Mystic Law but an

inferior teaching” (WND-1, 3). To seek the Mystic

Law somewhere outside of us essentially amounts

Faith for Attaining to evading responsibility for our own lives. Buddhahood in This Lifetime Practicing Nichiren Buddhism means not

being swayed this way and that; it means con-

Naturally, the Gohonzon—the object of devotion structing a self that is solid and resolute like in Nichiren Buddhism—in itself is great beyond towering Mount Fuji. But if we neglect this task measure. A passage from Nichikan’s Six-Volume and focus our energies somewhere else, before Writings9 that states: “Even someone who has not we’re even aware of it, we can end up veering onto yet aroused true faith will still receive immense the path of externally seeking the Law. benefit through connecting with the correct For example, if we chant to the Gohonzon but object [of devotion, namely, the Gohonzon]” always blame other people or our environment (Rokkansho, p. 81). for our circumstances, we are avoiding the chal-

The true lineage of faith we inherit in the Soka lenge of tackling our inner darkness or ignorance. Gakkai is what opens up this infinite and bound- By doing so, we are seeking enlightenment out-less power of the Gohonzon. Faith as practiced by side of us. By changing ourselves on a more the Soka Gakkai entails an active struggle to man- profound level, we can begin to improve our situ-ifest the Mystic Law in our lives; it also produces ation. Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the clear actual proof of benefit. When we advance driving force for that change. together with the Soka Gakkai, we naturally come It is also important that we don’t fall into the

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

trap of practicing “dependent faith,” where we pin says, “You must summon up deep faith” (WND-1,

our hopes on having our prayers answered 3), if we hope to make our inherent Buddha

through the divine or transcendent powers of nature the basis of our lives—or as Nichiren

gods or Buddhas. This is a typical example of terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime—

viewing the Law as outside oneself. The provi- we must continue striving to deepen our faith,

sional Buddhas of the pre-Lotus Sutra teachings10 our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

readily lend themselves to this kind of faith, the kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will manifest as

essence of which is escapism. confident and concrete prayer.

Even when they’re obviously suffering, people Because our practice of faith is aimed at

of dependent faith avoid looking at their prob- attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, it is essen-

lems. They don’t have the courage or make any tial that we have a solidly focused attitude when

actual effort to challenge their situation. In such chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It is like trying

cases, quite frankly, faith is simply something peo- to shoot an arrow: without a clear target, we won’t

ple hide behind as they avoid dealing with reality. draw the bow with any real force or determina-

Without a struggle, however, we cannot directly tion. In the same way, when we replace vague

engage the gears of our human revolution. yearnings with concrete determinations and con-

To use the analogy of mountain climbing, if we fident prayer, we can definitely accomplish what

just walk around the base of the mountain and we hope to achieve. never actually attempt to ascend its slopes, we’ll Grumbling and complaining are the principal

never reach the summit, no matter how much time gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

passes. If we avoid challenging our own issues, we lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find

can never strengthen and develop ourselves, and ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of

we won’t be able to attain Buddhahood in this ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual,

lifetime. it will act as a constant brake on our growth and

In addition, it is important that we try to rid cause us to forget about advancing and improv-

our lives of ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe- ing ourselves. We will then effectively close off our

lief as well as grumbling and complaining. The own potential, falling into the path of seeking the

erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the Mys- Law outside of us. While it might be a real chal-

tic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its core lenge to stop grumbling and complaining, we can

an inability to believe that all people—ourselves derive from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control

and others—possess the Buddha nature. And this these tendencies and use them as a springboard

disbelief stems from fundamental darkness. for positive growth and development.

In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to Let’s also strictly guard against slandering our

skeptically regard the Buddha nature as “a nice fellow members. Slandering and harboring resent-

ideal but one that doesn’t really change reality” ment and jealousy toward others results in denying

will manifest itself as prayer that is vague and their Buddha nature. The inability to believe in

lacking in conviction. If our efforts in faith are others’ Buddha nature—just like not believing in

halfhearted, we cannot change our attitude or our own—causes us to stray off course and seek

fundamentally transform our lives. the Law externally. Our Buddha nature is what

As Nichiren indicates in this writing when he fundamentally spurs us to realize happiness for

ourselves and others. Not to believe in the Buddha In contrast, Buddhist teachings that view the nature is to deny the spirit of the Lotus Sutra, Law as existing outside one’s own life tend to be which teaches that all people have the potential for authoritarian or formalistic, to disregard and Buddhahood. Consequently, Nichiren sternly repress people. They are prone to emphasizing rit-warns that if we go against the spirit of the sutra, uals or clerical authority, while their followers not only won’t we accomplish our desire to attain passively seek to assuage their anxieties through Buddhahood in this lifetime, but we will end up dependence on ceremonies or clergy. Further, tak-committing slander of the Law. 11 ing advantage of the fact that one of human beings’

Also, unless we practice together united in the greatest sources of anxiety is death and what comes spirit of “many in body, one in mind,” the great after, Buddhist schools of this kind in Japan have desire for kosen-rufu cannot be fulfilled.12 come to function almost exclusively as purveyors

Let us confirm once again that chanting Nam- of funeral and memorial services for the deceased, myoho-renge-kyo for the happiness of ourselves devolving into what is known as “funeral Bud-and others is the true means for attaining Bud- dhism.” They offer no philosophy that empowers dhahood in this lifetime. Each person has the people or enables them to live better lives. potential to become a Buddha. The Soka Gakkai’s founder, President

Makiguchi, asserted that Nichiren Buddhism is a

“teaching for transforming one’s life.” To believe

The Spirit of the First Three Presidents that the Mystic Law of Myoho-renge-kyo exists Pulses in the Soka Gakkai within us is to have the confidence that we will

definitely become happy and attain Buddhahood

A Buddhist teaching that affirms the existence of in this lifetime. Faith also means actively working the Law in each person’s life is one that treasures for kosen-rufu through sharing Nichiren Bud-the individual. It calls out to each person, encour- dhism based on the conviction that it holds the ages his or her individual human revolution and key to happiness for both ourselves and others. seeks to lead all people to enlightenment. In the This genuine faith pervades the Soka Gakkai and appearance of one person after another embracing the SGI. The greatness of the Soka Gakkai and the faith, we find the principle of bodhisattvas steadily first three presidents’ spirit of the oneness of emerging from the earth to propagate the Law, and mentor and disciple shine in the undertaking this the unchanging formula of kosen-rufu.13 most difficult of challenges—that of awakening

This is the path of the Soka Gakkai that the first people to the Law within. three presidents—Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, Josei President Toda used to say, “You should Toda and myself—have steadfastly followed. resolve, ‘I am Myoho-renge-kyo!’” The Mystic That is why the Soka Gakkai has achieved such phe- Law is the “highly effective medicine” (The Lotus nomenal development and why our kosen-rufu Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 269) movement has spread throughout the entire world. that relieves the sufferings of all people. It is also

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

the great treasure storehouse that brings good accord with these words, let’s cast aside cowardice

fortune and happiness to all. The important thing and make courage our foremost attribute. is to live out our lives based on and completely in People of courageous faith can break through

sync with the Law; it is to imbue and solidify our the dark clouds of fear, ignorance and delusion to

lives with the Mystic Law. bring the sun of the Mystic Law to shine and

Our daily realities are filled with an endless beautiful flowers of Myoho-renge—the lotus of

succession of problems. But with the firm belief the Mystic Law—to bloom in their lives. that our lives are Myoho-renge-kyo, we should President Toda gave the following guidance to

strive to boldly challenge everything with the young women’s division members in the pioneer-

unwavering conviction that we can overcome all ing days of our movement: “You should take

hardships and become happy without fail. When pride in possessing the same life as the Buddha of

we maintain deep faith based on the foundation the Latter Day. Win in life with a noble spirit. You

that “I am Myoho-renge-kyo,” we can take on any must absolutely never depreciate yourselves.”

problem with courage. The key to victory in life Nichiren Buddhism starts from the realization

lies in whether we can bring forth courage. Not a that the supreme life-condition of Buddhahood

shrinking timidity but a challenging courage— exists in each of us. It is a teaching that makes it

this is what we need to have! possible for us to achieve the profoundest inner

Irrespective of the obstacles we may encounter transformation—a transformation of our funda-

in the course of our practice, we must not retreat mental attitude or mind-set. That’s why Nichiren

a single step. We must not be alarmed or startled emphasizes the importance of our minds, of

by them. The power of the Mystic Law (Myoho- what’s in our hearts. renge-kyo) can triumph over anything. To become He writes: “Whether you chant the Buddha’s

deeply confident of this is most important. name, recite the sutra, or merely offer flowers and

Fearing hardships and bemoaning and resent- incense, all your virtuous acts will implant benefits

ing our environment are to believe that the Law is and roots of goodness in your life. With this convic-

outside our own lives. So is losing confidence in tion you should strive in faith” (WND-1, 4). All our

our ability to overcome our circumstances and efforts in faith—including our practice of reciting

turning to others in the hope that they will save the Lotus Sutra and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

us, or blaming others for our problems, or giving kyo each morning and evening, as well as all of our

in to hopelessness and resignation. various Soka Gakkai activities—are virtuous acts

When difficulties beset us, no matter how try- that “implant benefits and roots of goodness” in

ing they may be, we must clearly see them for the our lives. Those who advance with this deep aware-

obstacles or devilish functions they are and battle ness will be true victors who travel the direct path

against them without retreating. This is the way to attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. of life of those who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo Always upholding the great philosophy

and dedicate their lives to the Mystic Law. embodied in Nichiren’s words “It is the heart that

Nichiren Daishonin says, “[My] disciples cannot is important” (WND-1, 1000), let us lead magnif-

accomplish anything if they are cowardly” (“The icent, victorious lives! Teaching, Practice, and Proof,” WND-1, 481). In

1. Miao-lo, The Annotations on “Great Concentration and Insight.” arisen as his followers split into many schools. Nichikan worked

2. As used here, “the Buddha’s name” denotes Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. tirelessly to clarify the true meaning of Nichiren’s teachings. He

completed exegeses on Nichiren’s five major writings and other

3. Three meanings of myo: In “The Daimoku of the Lotus Sutra,”

works, and authored The Six-Volume Writings, which distinguishes

Nichiren Daishonin writes: “Myo means to be fully endowed,

the correct interpretations of Nichiren’s teachings from misleading

which in turn has the meaning of ‘perfect and full’” (WND-1, 146);

ones.

“The character myo means to open” (WND-1, 145); and “Myo

means to revive, that is, to return to life” (WND-1, 149). 10. The provisional teachings that preceded the Lotus Sutra do not

teach that the world of Buddhahood exists in all people, and

4. The unchanging nature inherent in all things and phenomena.

instead describe Buddhas as idealized and superior beings. The

5. The ten directions refers to the entire universe, all physical space. Pure Land (Nembutsu) teachings, for example, explain that instead

Specifically, the ten directions are the eight directions of the com- of relying on one’s own efforts, one should exclusively depend on

pass—north, south, east, west, northwest, northeast, southeast and salvation through such a Buddha—namely, Amida.

southwest—plus up and down. Buddhist scriptures refer to the

11. In “The Fourteen Slanders,” Nichiren writes: “There is a difference

existence of Buddha lands in all directions throughout the uni-

if one chants the daimoku while acting against the intent of this

verse, each with its own Buddha. The expression the Buddhas of the

sutra . . . Always remember that believers in the Lotus Sutra should

ten directions in the sutras indicates these Buddhas. The phrase ten

absolutely be the last to abuse one another. All those who keep faith

directions often appears with the phrase three existences, meaning

in the Lotus Sutra are most certainly Buddhas, and one who slan-

past, present and future existences. “The Buddhas of the ten direc-

ders a Buddha commits a grave offense” (WND-1, 756).

tions and three existences” thus means all Buddhas throughout

space and time. 12. In “The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life,” Nichiren writes: “All

disciples and lay supporters of Nichiren should chant Nam-

6. Substituting faith for wisdom: The principle that faith is the true

myoho-renge-kyo with the spirit of many in body but one in mind,

cause for gaining supreme wisdom, and faith alone leads to

transcending all differences among themselves to become as insep-

enlightenment.

arable as fish and the water in which they swim. This spiritual

7. Originally inherent mystic truth: The fundamental Law, Mystic bond is the basis for the universal transmission of the ultimate Law

Law or Buddha nature with which all life is originally endowed. of life and death. Herein lies the true goal of Nichiren’s propaga-

8. Various obstacles and hindrances to the practice of Buddhism that tion. When you are so united, even the great desire for widespread

appear as a result of one advancing correctly along the path of faith. propagation can be fulfilled” (WND-1, 217).

9. Nichikan was the twenty-sixth chief priest of Taiseki-ji, the head 13. In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” Nichiren writes: “At first

temple of the Nikko school (also known as the Fuji school). He is only Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two,

revered as the restorer of Nichiren’s teachings because he worked to three, and a hundred followed, chanting and teaching others. Prop-

clarify their true meaning. During the four centuries after Nichiren agation will unfold this way in the future as well. Does this not

Daishonin’s death, a number of errors and misconceptions had signify ‘emerging from the earth’?” (WND-1, 385).

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Key Points:

The Essence of Chanting Confident and Concrete Prayer

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo The erroneous belief that Myoho-renge-kyo (the

The Law contained in the practice of chanting Mystic Law) exists outside of our lives has at its

spread by Nichiren is truly wondrous. But even the core an inability to believe that all people—our-

power of this wondrous Law cannot fully manifest selves and others—possess the Buddha nature.

in a life clouded by ignorance. Ignorance is the And this disbelief stems from fundamental dark-

inner darkness that prevents us from believing in ness. In terms of attitude in faith, this tendency to

the Mystic Law and staying focused on our own skeptically regard the Buddha nature as “a nice

Buddha nature and that of others. The practice of ideal but one that doesn’t really change reality” will

chanting enables us to break through this darkness manifest itself as prayer that is vague and lacking in

and vibrantly bring forth our Buddhahood. Bat- conviction. If our efforts in faith are halfhearted,

tling our fundamental darkness—this inner we cannot change our attitude or fundamentally

struggle is the essence of chanting Nam-myoho- transform our lives. As Nichiren indicates in this

renge-kyo. (p. 29) writing when he says, “You must summon up deep

faith” (WND-1, 3), if we hope to make our inher-

The Heart of Buddhism ent Buddha nature the basis of our lives—or as

If we seek enlightenment outside of us, we are not Nichiren terms it, to attain Buddhahood in this

pursuing the path of “observing one’s mind,”

lifetime—we must continue striving to deepen our

which enables us to overcome the fundamental evil

faith, our conviction in chanting Nam-myoho-

of ignorance or darkness. In that case, all our

renge-kyo. And as our faith deepens, it will

efforts and good deeds to attain enlightenment will

manifest as confident and concrete prayer. (p. 43)

be lacking the vital ingredient; they will be every

bit as futile as counting a neighbor’s vast riches.

Moreover, because none of these efforts will help Overcoming Grumbling

us eradicate our ignorance, they will only become and Complaining

“an endless, painful austerity.” This battle against Grumbling and complaining are the principal

ignorance is the heart of Buddhism. (p. 30) gateways to ambiguous, elusive doubt and disbe-

lief. Even if we know it is wrong, we may find

The Driving Force for ourselves grumbling and complaining in spite of

Our Transformation ourselves. Should such behavior become habitual,

If we chant to the Gohonzon but always blame it will act as a constant brake on our growth and

other people or our environment for our circum- cause us to forget about advancing and improving

stances, we are avoiding the challenge of tackling ourselves. We will then effectively close off our own

our inner darkness or ignorance. By doing so, we potential, falling into the path of seeking the Law

are seeking enlightenment outside of us. By chang- outside of us. While it might be a real challenge to

ing ourselves on a more profound level that we stop grumbling and complaining, we can derive

can begin to improve our situation. Chanting from the Mystic Law the wisdom to control these

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is the driving force for that tendencies and use them as a springboard for pos-

change. (p. 31) itive growth and development. (p. 32)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime

[Chapter 5]

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

With a “Brave and Vigorous” Spirit—

Polishing Our Lives Through Daily Challenge

The Vimalakirti Sutra states that, when one seeks the Buddhas’ emancipation

in the minds of ordinary beings, one finds that ordinary beings are the entities

of enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth and death are nirvana. It

also states that, if the minds of living beings are impure, their land is also

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their land. There are not two lands,

pure or impure in themselves. The difference lies solely in the good or evil of

our minds.

It is the same with a Buddha and an ordinary being. When deluded, one is

called an ordinary being, but when enlightened, one is called a Buddha. This

is similar to a tarnished mirror that will shine like a jewel when polished. A

mind now clouded by the illusions of the innate darkness of life is like a tar-

nished mirror, but when polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror,

reflecting the essential nature of phenomena [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the

true aspect of reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish your mirror day

and night. How should you polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

kyo. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Those whose hearts shine with a commit- finds that ordinary beings are the entities of ment to truth and justice never lose enlightenment, and that the sufferings of birth hope, even amid the greatest hardship or and death are nirvana” 2 (WND-1, 4). difficulty. Rather, they serve as a bright beacon “Ordinary beings are the entities of enlight-

illuminating the darkness of people’s suffering, enment” means that the wisdom for attaining imparting inspiration, assurance and courage. Buddhahood (enlightenment) manifests in the

When we change, the world changes. The lives of ordinary people steeped in earthly

key to all change is in our inner transforma- desires. Similarly, “the sufferings of birth and tion—a change in our hearts and minds. This is death are nirvana” means that the Buddha life-human revolution. We all have the power to state of true peace and tranquillity (nirvana)

change. When we realize this truth of life, we manifests in the lives of ordinary people tor-can bring forth that power anywhere, anytime mented by the sufferings of birth and death. and in any situation. Here, Nichiren explains that Buddhas and

Nichiren Buddhism, based on the transfor- ordinary people are not separated by an insur-mative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has made mountable divide; that the only thing setting this great path of inner change available to them apart is the difference in the “minds of

all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho- ordinary beings.” renge-kyo as its core practice. Nichiren also cites the passage from the

This time, I’ll discuss the passage in which Vimalakirti Sutra that explains the difference

Nichiren Daishonin outlines the basic attitude between pure and impure lands. This passage— and approach to our fundamental practice of which Nichiren summarizes as “If the minds of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. living beings are impure, their land is also

impure, but if their minds are pure, so is their

land”3—clarifies that there are not two separate

Changing Ourselves lands; the only difference between pure and

and Changing the Land impure lands is “the good or evil of our minds.”

The view shown here is one in which the pure

As I have already touched on at length, the land does not exist in some otherworldly realm

entirety of Buddhism exists within our own but in the real world, and is achieved by people lives. And the key to attaining Buddhahood—the changing themselves inside. This is a dynamic ultimate transformation of our life-state—also and practical view of the pure land, based on

lies in a change in our hearts, or minds. the idea of “to purify Buddha lands” expounded

To convey this point, Nichiren Daishonin in the Lotus Sutra (The Lotus Sutra and Its here summarizes a point from the Vimalakirti Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 117).

Sutra: 1 “When one seeks the Buddhas’ emanci- The Vimalakirti Sutra passage cited by Nichi-pation in the minds of ordinary beings, one ren is from the “Inquiring about the Illness,”

or fifth, chapter. This chapter describes the Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiritual

exchange between Vimalakirti, an outstanding level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can

Buddhist lay believer and practitioner of the overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the

bodhisattva way who has fallen ill, and Manju- root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood

shri, one of Shakyamuni’s leading disciples, who with which we are originally endowed.

is visiting him. When asked the cause of his Here, Nichiren uses an analogy to describe

illness, Vimalakirti replies, “Because all living this fundamental potential for change, saying,

beings are sick, therefore I am sick.”4 This is a “This is similar to a tarnished mirror that will

well-known passage that succinctly reveals the shine like a jewel when polished” (WND-1, 4).

fundamental bodhisattva spirit of taking on In this way, he conveys that the practice of

others’ sufferings as one’s own. chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the means

Vimalakirti goes on to say that bodhisattvas for defeating our inner darkness—serves to

choose to be born among living beings afflicted “polish” our lives. by delusion and to share in the sufferings of All living beings are inherently entities of the

birth and death in order to instruct and guide Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud-

those living beings to enlightenment. More- dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of

over, bodhisattvas are never overwhelmed or the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin-

swayed by suffering, because they have estab- drance, whenever and in whatever form it is

lished a pure state of enlightenment within.5 needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life

Thus, the passages from the Vimalakirti to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even

Sutra cited by Nichiren clarify the meaning of though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we

Buddhahood and the pure land from the stand- cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our

point of a bodhisattva practitioner fighting lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a

amid the realities of daily life. Nichiren, there- benighted state, we are like a “tarnished mirror”

fore, states in conclusion, “When deluded, one that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-

is called an ordinary being, but when enlight- myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing

ened, one is called a Buddha” (WND-1, 4). In the tarnished mirror of our lives.

other words, the difference between ordinary

people and Buddhas is nothing more than the

difference between delusion and enlightenment The Path for Polishing Our Lives: in ordinary people’s minds. How, then, can we (1) Brave Challenge

transform delusion into enlightenment?

In the preceding passage, Nichiren explains Nichiren Daishonin says with regard to chant-

that when people’s hearts change, the land or ing as a practice for polishing our lives: “A mind

their external environment can also change. At now clouded by the illusions of the innate dark-

its foundation is a transformation from delu- ness of life is like a tarnished mirror, but when

sion to enlightenment. polished, it is sure to become like a clear mirror,

As discussed earlier, what makes this trans- reflecting the essential nature of phenomena

formation possible is the practice of chanting [i.e., the Dharma nature] and the true aspect of

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

SGI President Ikeda

welcomes U.N.

Under-Secretary-General

ress Anwarul K. Chowdhury at

P

o the Makiguchi Memorial Hall

Seiky in Tokyo, August 30, 2006.

reality. Arouse deep faith, and diligently polish Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to polish

your mirror day and night. How should you our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of

polish it? Only by chanting Nam-myoho-renge- ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our

kyo” (WND-1, 4). enlightened Dharma nature.

The mirror simile here is truly ingenious. This practice of polishing our lives may be

The mirror being endowed with the property seen as having two aspects. One is to “arouse

of reflection corresponds to our lives being deep faith,” as Nichiren exhorts (WND-1, 4).

endowed with the mystic truth. But if a mirror is This could also be articulated as summoning

not polished, it will naturally become clouded. the fighting spirit to battle our inner darkness.

Since mirrors in Nichiren’s day were typically The other aspect is to continue making stead-

made of bronze, they would readily tarnish. A fast efforts, in accord with Nichiren’s

tarnished mirror could not fulfill its original admonition that we should “diligently polish

function, so it had to be polished regularly. our mirror day and night” (see WND-1, 4).

Similarly, if our lives are neglected and left These two points echo the two aspects of

uncultivated, they will be shrouded in ignorance. chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo identified

The act of polishing is indispensable for by Nichikan, a seventeenth-century restorer of

restoring the mirror’s innate property. More- Nichiren Buddhism, based on the phrase in

over, just polishing a mirror once is not the “Expedient Means” chapter of the Lotus

enough. We have to keep polishing it if we wish Sutra, “exert oneself bravely and vigorously”

it to retain its reflective property. As this (see LSOC, 56; Jpn yumyo shojin). Nichikan metaphor aptly attests, our practice of chanting explains that “bravely and vigorously” (yumyo)

means courageously bringing forth the power Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a crucial requirement

of faith, or confidence, in chanting Nam-myoho- for attaining Buddhahood.

renge-kyo, while “exert oneself ” (shojin) means Nichiren writes: “Suffer what there is to suf-

engaging sincerely and consistently in the fer, enjoy what there is to enjoy. Regard both

practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.6 suffering and joy as facts of life, and continue

In chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, the chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, no matter

first important thing is having the challeng- what happens. How could this be anything other

ing spirit to act with courage. This could be than the boundless joy of the Law?” (“Happiness

described as arousing deep faith from the in This World,” WND-1, 681). We must continue

innermost reaches of our lives in accord with chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo during times

Nichiren’s words, firmly believing that we can of both suffering and joy. The emphasis here is

summon forth the mystic truth within us, on the word continue, and it is key that we do so manifest our inherent Buddhahood and throughout “both suffering and joy.” When con-

attain enlightenment in this lifetime without fronted with suffering, we must not retreat. We

fail. It also means directly taking on the three should “suffer what there is to suffer.” This is nei-

obstacles and four devils that seek to obstruct ther resignation nor escapism. We need to fix

us from chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. We our gaze unflinchingly on reality and bravely

need to have a fearless, tireless and unremit- challenge it based on chanting Nam-myoho-

ting challenging spirit to confront and renge-kyo. Nichiren is explaining that this is the

overcome the diverse array of obstacles that correct attitude for practitioners of the Mystic

rise up to assail us. For it is precisely by chal- Law. Faith in Nichiren Buddhism is constantly

lenging, battling and defeating ignorance that directed toward transforming reality. we can polish our lives. Of course, such a state of life is not gained

overnight. But if we steadfastly and diligently

continue making efforts to polish ourselves day

The Path for Polishing Our Lives: in and day out, month after month, year after

(2) Continuing year, we will naturally and surely come to attain

it, mirroring the words of the sutra passage

Next, continuing is vital. It is absolutely essential “This cluster of unsurpassed jewels / has come

for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. to us unsought” (LSOC, 124).7 Nichiren Daishonin says: “To accept is easy; to Next, “enjoy what there is to enjoy” (WND-1,

continue is difficult. But Buddhahood lies in 681), can be taken to mean that when we’re expe-

continuing faith” (“The Difficulty of Sustaining riencing joy, we should remember to have

Faith,” WND-1, 471). In “On Attaining Buddha- gratitude and make even greater efforts to chant

hood in This Lifetime,” we see the paramount Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, aiming toward the ulti-

importance of continuing from Nichiren’s mate goal of attaining Buddhahood in this

repeated emphasis on the need to practice “day lifetime. Deepening our seeking spirit in faith is

and night” and “diligently” (WND-1, 4). Main- much more difficult in good times than in bad,

taining an unflagging practice of chanting because in good times it is easy to grow lax and

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

self-satisfied. Rather than being someone who is an unshakable state of life that is one with the

strong in adversity but weak when things are Dharma nature (namely, the life-state of Bud-

going well, we should seek to construct the kind dhahood). This is because if we “slacken in our

of invincible faith that allows us to “regard both resolve even a bit” (see WND-1, 997), as Nichi-

suffering and joy as facts of life” (WND-1, 681). ren writes, we will become vulnerable to life’s

Such strong faith is forged through our prac- negative influences. tice as Soka Gakkai members striving to achieve Also, when we exert ourselves in faith, the

the lofty goal of kosen-rufu and our own enlight- three obstacles and four devils inevitably arise.

enment in this existence. Above all, chanting It is by defeating them that we can establish the

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—the process by which life-state of Buddhahood. When we polish our

we “diligently polish our mirror day and night” lives on the most fundamental level through

(see WND-1, 4)—strengthens our lives in the the practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

same way that a magnificent sword is forged and kyo, we can deepen, strengthen and broaden

tempered. The crux here lies in chanting with the ourselves spiritually without limit.

spirit to challenge in times of suffering, and

chanting with appreciation in times of joy.

“Continuing” is another way of saying “not “Nam-myoho-renge-kyo regressing.” Throughout the pages of Nichiren’s Is a Diligent Practice”

writings, we can see his emphasis on never

regressing or backsliding in faith. To cite but a Nichiren Daishonin strove to share the supreme

few passages, Nichiren writes: “One . . . who inner state of attaining Buddhahood in this

chants the daimoku, is the Thus Come One’s lifetime with all his followers—and indeed all

emissary. Also, one who perseveres through humankind.

great persecutions and embraces the sutra from The true greatness of the practice of chant-

beginning to end is the Thus Come One’s emis- ing Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is that it enables

sary” (“The Farther the Source, the Longer the each person to actually manifest the same

Stream,” WND-1, 942); “Strengthen your faith life-state as the Buddha and lead an existence

day by day and month after month. Should you of unsurpassed depth and meaning. This is

slacken in your resolve even a bit, devils will clearly indicated in the following well-known

take advantage” (“On Persecution Befalling the passage from The Record of the Orally Transmit-Sage,” WND-1, 997); and “Carry through with ted Teachings : “If in a single moment of life we your faith in the Lotus Sutra. You cannot strike exhaust the pains and trials of millions of

fire from flint if you stop halfway” (“Earthly kalpas, then instant after instant there will arise

Desires Are Enlightenment,” WND-1, 319). in us the three Buddha bodies8 with which we

Without a battle to conquer ignorance or are eternally endowed. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

darkness, we cannot manifest the essential is just such a ‘diligent’ practice” (p. 214). nature of phenomena, or Dharma nature. And Ever since our second Soka Gakkai presi-

unless we continue to wage this battle through dent, Josei Toda, explained this passage to me

exerting ourselves in faith, we cannot construct in my youth, I have made it the personal

motto by which I have lived my life. In all my Praying for Brave and struggles, I have borne these words ever in mind. Vigorous Youth To Appear

The “Emerging from the Earth” chapter

of the Lotus Sutra describes countless Exerting oneself means doing so bravely and bodhisattvas appearing from out of the vigorously. Without courage and vigor, there is

ground—the emergence of the Bodhisattvas of no true exertion. The first Soka Gakkai presi-

the Earth. It explains that they have been dent, Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, also led a life of

dwelling in the empty space underneath the brave and vigorous endeavor. He once said to

saha world and seeking the Buddha way with young people: “Exert yourselves bravely and

constant diligence (see LSOC, 259). The above vigorously! Buddhism means taking action; it

quote from The Record of the Orally Transmit- means constantly striving. Even at my age,

ted Teachings clarifies from the standpoint of that’s what I’m doing.” Nichiren Buddhism the nature of their dili- President Toda also remarked to youth,

gence or tireless exertion. “Youth who wish for the happiness of humanity

The essence of Nichiren Buddhism is that should first themselves seek the essence of this

those who exert themselves assiduously to seek lofty philosophy of human revolution. They

the Buddha way automatically manifest the should exert themselves bravely and vigorously

life-state of the Buddha eternally endowed with to fight and triumph over all manifestations of

the three bodies—in other words, they bring the three powerful enemies and the three

forth their inherent Buddhahood. obstacles and four devils.”

When we chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo as if My sentiments are exactly the same. I chant

to concentrate in a single moment the arduous Nam-myoho-renge-kyo ardently for brave and

exertions of incalculable eons—“exhausting the vigorous disciples, brave and vigorous youth, to

pains and trials of millions of kalpas” (see OTT, appear throughout the world. I am wholeheart-

214)—then the life-state of the Buddha eternal- edly chanting for this every day. Exerting oneself

ly endowed with the three bodies (namely, our bravely and vigorously is truly the hallmark of

Buddhahood) appears within us instant after the Soka Gakkai’s mentor-disciple spirit.

instant. The practice of chanting Nam-myoho-

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice. renge-kyo is the driving force for progress,

Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing the driving force for victory. Every challenge

to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires should begin with chanting Nam-myoho-

constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering renge-kyo. No one is a match for those who

single-mindedly and consistently in this practice steadfastly chant. will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this Diligently chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

lifetime. Through such efforts, our inherent morning and evening, let us thoroughly polish

Buddhahood—the Buddha eternally endowed ourselves inside and construct lives in which we

with the three bodies—wells forth in the form win victory after victory. of inexhaustible courage, perseverance, joy,

wisdom and compassion.

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

1. Vimalakirti Sutra: A Mahayana sutra about Vimalakirti, a wealthy and enters the realm of birth and death, and because he is in the realm of

prominent citizen of the city of Vaishali at the time of Shakyamuni. In birth and death he suffers illness. If living beings can gain release from

the sutra, Vimalakirti represents the ideal Mahayana lay believer. The illness, then the bodhisattva will no longer be ill.” The Vimalakirti

Sanskrit original of this sutra is not extant, but there are three Chinese Sutra, p. 65.

translations, including one by Kumarajiva, which is the most popular 5. The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 65ff.

version and the work usually referred to when this title is mentioned.

6. In “Interpreting the Text Based upon Its Essential Meaning,” a treatise of

2. Here, Nichiren Daishonin summarizes passages from the Vimalakirti

The Six-Volume Writings,Nichikan writes: “You should understand that

Sutra and the Great Teacher T’ien-t’ai’s reference to it. “Inquiring

‘to exert oneself bravely and vigorously’ (see LSOC, 56; Jpn yumyo sho-

About the Illness,” the fifth chapter of the sutra, contains the following

jin) refers to faith and to chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. It therefore

exchange: “‘And how is the emancipation of the Buddhas to be sought?’

means the chanting of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo of the essential teaching.

asked Manjushri. ‘It may be sought in the minds . . . of all living

‘Bravely and vigorously’ (yumyo) refers to faith. A commentary [on the

beings,’ replied Vimalakirti.” The Vimalakirti Sutra, trans. by Burton

Lotus Sutra] therefore states: ‘Yu (bravely) means to act with courage;

Watson from the Chinese version by Kumarajiva (New York: Columbia

myo (vigorously) means to expend all one’s wisdom.’ Hence, ‘bravely

University Press, 1997), p. 66.

and vigorously’ describes courageously bringing forth the power of faith

In his Great Concentration and Insight, T’ien-t’ai writes: “According

to the Vimalakirti Sutra, the emancipation of the Thus Come One to the fullest extent. Shojin (to exert oneself) indicates the practice of

should be sought in the minds of living beings. Because living beings chanting daimoku. A commentary therefore states: ‘Sho (pure) means

are entities of enlightenment, it is not something to be obtained. unadulterated; jin (effort) means ceaseless advance.’”

Because [the birth and death of] living beings are nirvana, [birth and 7. These words are an exclamation of joy when Shakyamuni’s voice-

death] are not extinguished. Emancipation already exists in the heart hearer disciples learn that they can in fact attain Buddhahood, which

of one and the hearts of all, as do all phenomena.” had previously been denied to them.

3. This summary is based on the passage, “When the mind is pure, the 8. The three bodies of the Buddha refer to the Dharma body, the reward

Buddha land will be pure.” The Vimalakirti Sutra, p. 29. body and the manifested body. The Dharma body is the fundamental

4. Vimalakirti says: “Because all living beings are sick, therefore I am sick. truth, or Law, to which a Buddha is enlightened. The reward body is

If all living beings are relieved of sickness, then my sickness will be the wisdom to perceive the Law. And the manifested body is the com-

mended. Why? Because the bodhisattva for the sake of living beings passionate actions the Buddha carries out to lead people to happiness.

SGI President Ikeda’s

Lecture Series

The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life

A series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on Nichiren Daishonin’s writing “The Heritage of the Ultimate Law of Life.” Nichiren states: “Shakyamuni

Buddha who attained enlightenment countless kalpas ago, the Lotus Sutra that leads all people to Buddhahood, and we ordinary human beings are in no way diff erent or separate from one another. To chant Myoho-renge-kyo with this realization is to inherit the ultimate Law of life and death.”

SKU #290991 • $5.95

Learning From the Writings:

The Hope-fi lled Teachings of Nichiren Daishonin

A series of lectures by SGI President Ikeda on 15 writings from Nichiren

Daishonin, including “Winter Always Turns to Spring,” “The Dragon Gate,” “The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra” and “Lessening One’s Karmic Retribution.” President Ikeda states in the introduction to this lecture series: “The writings of Nichiren Daishonin fully elucidate this philosophy of hope as well as its practice and

proof. They are a source of illumination that endlessly encourages and inspires . . . Let us strive to read with our lives—that is, to put into practice—even a line or two of Nichiren’s writings, which overfl ow with his spirit.”

SKU #290992 • $8.95

Available at your local SGI-USA bookstore or from:

(800) 626-1313 or bookstore.sgi-usa.org 

Key Points

When We Change, the World Changes Arousing Deep Faith

When we change, the world changes. The key to and Making Continual Efforts all change is in our inner transformation—a The act of polishing is indispensable for restoring

change in our hearts and minds. This is human the mirror’s innate property. Moreover, just polish-

revolution. We all have the power to change. ing a mirror once is not enough. We have to keep

When we realize this truth of life, we can bring polishing it if we wish it to retain its reflective prop-

forth that power anywhere, anytime and in any erty. As this metaphor aptly attests, our practice of

situation. Nichiren Buddhism, based on the chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a struggle to

transformative principles of the Lotus Sutra, has polish our lives, thereby wiping away the dust of

made this great path of inner change available to ignorance and heightening the brilliance of our

all people, with the chanting of Nam-myoho- enlightened Dharma nature. This practice of pol-

renge-kyo as its core practice. (p. 38) ishing our lives may be seen as having two aspects.

One is to “arouse deep faith,” as Nichiren exhorts

Changing the Environment (WND-1, 4). This could also be articulated as sum-

Through Changing People’s Hearts moning the fighting spirit to battle our inner

darkness. The other aspect is to continue making

Nichiren explains that when people’s hearts steadfast efforts, in accord with Nichiren’s admoni-

change, the land or their external environment tion that we should “diligently polish our mirror

can also change. At its foundation is a transforma- day and night” (see WND-1, 4). (p. 40) tion from delusion to enlightenment. What makes

this transformation possible is the practice of

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and, on a spiri-

tual level, faith. Simply put, through faith we can Is a Diligent Practice overcome the ignorance or darkness that is the Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is a diligent practice.

root of delusion and manifest the Buddhahood Arousing deep faith and steadfastly continuing

with which we are originally endowed. (p. 39) to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo truly requires

constant and unflagging exertion. Persevering

Polishing Our Lives Through single-mindedly and consistently in this practice

Chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo will lead us to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

Through such efforts, our inherent Buddha-

All living beings are inherently entities of the hood—the Buddha eternally endowed with the

Mystic Law. And inherently, the life-state of Bud- three bodies—wells forth in the form of inex-

dhahood enables us to tap the limitless power of haustible courage, perseverance, joy, wisdom and

the Mystic Law within us freely and without hin- compassion. (p. 43) drance, whenever and in whatever form it is

needed. Nichiren likens this supreme state of life

to a clear mirror that shines like a jewel. Yet even

though we are an entity of the Mystic Law, we

cannot bring forth the power of that Law if our

lives are shrouded in ignorance. In such a

benighted state, we are like a “tarnished mirror”

that will not reflect anything. Chanting Nam-

myoho-renge-kyo is the practice for polishing the

tarnished mirror of our lives. (p. 39)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime

[Chapter 6]

The Mystic Nature of Our Lives—

“Become the Master of Your Mind

Rather Than Let Your Mind Master You”

What then does myo signify? It is simply the mysterious nature of our life from

moment to moment, which the mind cannot comprehend or words express.

When we look into our own mind at any moment, we perceive neither color

nor form to verify that it exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for

many differing thoughts continually occur. The mind cannot be considered

either to exist or not to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that transcends

both the words and concepts of existence and nonexistence. It is neither exis-

tence nor nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both. It is the mystic entity

of the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality. Myo is the name given to the

mystic nature of life, and ho, to its manifestations [the manifestations of the

mind of myo]. Renge, which means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the

wonder of this Law. If we understand that our life at this moment is myo, then

we will also understand that our life at other moments is the Mystic Law. This

realization is the mystic kyo, or sutra. The Lotus Sutra is the king of sutras, the

direct path to enlightenment, for it explains that the entity of our life, which

manifests either good or evil at each moment, is in fact the entity of the

Mystic Law. (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

“ t is the heart that is important” (“The mirror reflecting the essential nature of phenom-Strategy of the Lotus Sutra,” WND-1, 1000), ena and the true aspect of reality” (see WND-1, 4). I

writes Nichiren Daishonin. Our hearts, our In other words, by manifesting the mystic truth

minds, are truly wondrous and unfathomable. We that resides within us, we can tap our infinite

can expand and deepen the inner realm of our inner potential. Buddhahood is the state of life

spirit infinitely and boundlessly. that is one with Myoho-renge-kyo, the originally

Like the elation of soaring freely through the inherent mystic truth. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is

vast blue heavens, the heart can feel immense and also the name of this ultimate state of life. untrammeled joy. Like the clear, bright sunshine The passage I will discuss this time explains

illuminating all things, the heart can embrace the relation between Myoho-renge-kyo and the

with warmth and compassion those who are suf- mind of living beings in terms of the elements of

fering. And like a lion of justice, the heart can also myo, ho, renge and kyo. This explanation may be at times tremble with righteous anger and defeat seen as a description of how our lives become

evil. Indeed, our hearts or minds are constantly one with Myoho-renge-kyo and manifest the

changing, like scenes in a drama or like an unfold- state of Buddhahood. Let us consider the pro-

ing panorama. And nothing is more wondrous found meaning of this passage. than the heart’s ability to manifest the world of

Buddhahood. Even people weighed down by

delusion and suffering can bring forth in the The Mind Is the Mystic Entity of the depths of their lives the state of Buddhahood that Middle Way That Is the Ultimate Reality is one with the universe. This momentous drama

of transformation is the greatest of all wonders. Nichiren Daishonin says that myo of Myoho-

Buddhism finds supreme nobility and the renge-kyo signifies the marvelous nature of our

potential for great change in all human beings. lives from moment to moment. And he uses the

In “On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” concepts of existence and nonexistence to describe

Nichiren, therefore, concludes that when we this wondrous and unfathomable nature. thoroughly polish our lives through chanting Our minds are in a state of constant flux,

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, it is possible for us to moving with the ebb and flow of countless

tap the life-state of Buddhahood no matter thoughts and emotions. Nichiren notes: “When

how steeped in delusion we may be, and to we look into our own mind at any moment, we

transform even the most impure and evil land perceive neither color nor form to verify that it

into a pure land. exists. Yet we still cannot say it does not exist, for

Myoho-renge-kyo is the name of the “mystic many differing thoughts continually occur. The

truth that is originally inherent in all living mind cannot be considered either to exist or not

beings” (WND-1, 3). Accordingly, through the to exist. Life is indeed an elusive reality that tran-

practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we scends both the words and concepts of existence

can reveal our inner Buddhahood—polishing “the and nonexistence. It is neither existence nor

tarnished mirror of a mind now clouded by the nonexistence, yet exhibits the qualities of both”

illusions of the innate darkness of life” into “a clear (WND-1, 4).

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Nichiren describes this unfathomable Renge Refers to the Principle of the nature of the mind as the “mystic entity of the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect Middle Way that is the ultimate reality” (WND-

1, 4). The Middle Way does not simply mean Nichiren Daishonin next states that ho, meaning the middle course between two extremes; it Law or phenomena, is the name given to the

refers to a more lofty perspective that is swayed manifestations of the mystic nature of our lives or

by neither extreme but also embraces them minds—a term that can also be expressed as the

both. Shakyamuni set forth a sound philosophy wondrous mind or the “mind of myo.” The mind and practice transcending the two then-pre- of myo is itself the Mystic Law. Abstract words vailing extremes of hedonism and asceticism, and theories alone—be they the concepts of

and he called this the Middle Way. In “On nonsubstantiality or the unification of the three

Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” Nich- truths—cannot be called the Mystic Law. For only

iren says that the ultimate truth, which when the Mystic Law is expressed as the highest

transcends the two extremes of existence and human wisdom based on the Middle Way can it

nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the spread as a guide and compass, and as a teaching

Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of or Law (ho) for people to follow. truth, he calls it the “ultimate reality.” In addition, Nichiren says: “Renge, which

Transcending existence and nonexistence can means lotus flower, is used to symbolize the won-

be taken to mean transcending impermanent der of this Law” (WND-1, 4). The Mystic Law is

phenomena that alternate ceaselessly between not visible to the human eye. Therefore, the Bud-

existence and nonexistence. Further, exhibiting dha uses a concrete symbol in order to help

the qualities of both existence and nonexistence people understand the Law’s wondrous and mys-

while transcending both does not refer to a tran- tic nature. This is renge, meaning “lotus flower.” scendent or absolute being divorced from Why does he employ the lotus flower? Usually

impermanent phenomena, but indicates the truly plants flower first and then bear fruit—a relation-

eternal that encompasses and resides within ship that is used to illustrate linear or sequential

impermanent phenomena. causality, with the flowers representing the cause

Although Nichiren explains the mysterious and the fruit the effect. In Buddhism, this is

nature of life or mind in terms of the concepts referred to as the nonsimultaneity of cause and

of existence and nonexistence in this writing, effect. By contrast, the lotus flower puts forth its

what he says here is comparable to Nagarjuna’s petals and its receptacle (which contains its fruit)

concept of nonsubstantiality,1 and to T’ien- simultaneously—in other words, its fruit is pro-

t’ai’s concepts of the unification of the three duced at the same time its petals open. The lotus

truths2 and the threefold contemplation in a thus symbolizes the principle of the simultaneity

single mind.3 Essentially, “the mystic entity of of cause and effect. the Middle Way that is the ultimate reality” of The provisional teachings other than the Lotus

which Nichiren speaks refers to our lives or Sutra do not teach that Buddhahood is inherent

minds that are one with the ultimate truth—a within the lives of ordinary people, which is

concept expressed variously as nonsubstantial- regarded as the cause for attaining enlightenment.

ity, the unification of the three truths, or Rather, they teach that one can only gain the state

threefold contemplation in a single mind. of Buddhahood after undergoing countless eons of

Buddhist practice. Here, cause and effect are non- bone and marrow of our beings, with flowers of

simultaneous. The teachings of the Lotus Sutra, benefit blossoming in our characters and in our

however, clarify that all people are originally lives. This is the mystic kyo in terms of our indi-endowed with the state of Buddhahood and can vidual lives. reveal it instantaneously. In other words, the Also, we can regard this mystic kyo as the deluded mind of an ordinary person is instantly spread of the Mystic Law from ourselves to

transformed into the mind of myo (the supreme others. When “the mind at this moment” is

enlightenment) of a Buddha. The lotus flower understood to mean the Buddha’s mind and “the

symbolizes this simultaneity of cause and effect. mind at other moments” is taken to mean the

minds of all living beings, then kyo refers to the Buddha’s teachings that expound aspects of his

Maintaining the Mind of Myo enlightenment regarding the mystic nature of

Is the Mystic Kyo life, or the mind of myo. And the king of sutras

that directly elucidates the mind of myo itself is

Nichiren Daishonin explains that kyo, meaning the Lotus Sutra, the essence of which is Myoho-

“sutra,” of Myoho-renge-kyo also refers to realiz- renge-kyo. In that sense, the development of

ing the mystic nature of life. He says: “If we kosen-rufu, with people propagating the Mystic

understand that our life at this moment is myo, Law and chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

then we will also understand that our life at other unstintingly for their own happiness and that of

moments is the Mystic Law. This realization is the others and teaching others to do the same, could

mystic kyo, or sutra” (WND-1, 4). be said to correspond to the mystic kyo.

Kyo is written with a Chinese character indi- As seen in the aforementioned discussion,

cating the vertical thread, or warp, in a loom or Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent in our own

fabric, and it is also used to refer to the passage of lives. The ongoing moment-to-moment transfor-

time. In this respect, Nichiren speaks of our lives mation in our hearts and minds that we achieve

or minds at this moment and our lives or minds through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo not

at other moments. Our lives or minds are con- only leads to a fundamental inner change but to a

stantly changing, but when we defeat our inner change in the entire way we live our lives, putting

darkness, or ignorance, through strong faith us on track to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime.

expressed through our chanting Nam-myoho- And it further creates a groundswell for the great

renge-kyo, the innate mystic truth appears within transformation of all humankind that is kosen-

us, and the life of Myoho-renge—literally, lotus of rufu. The dynamic force for change on all levels is

the Mystic Law—blooms within our hearts. Myoho-renge-kyo.

Day by day, through consistently chanting

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, we can accumulate the

causes and effects for attaining Buddhahood that Becoming the Masters of Our Minds make it possible to transform a mind clouded by

the innate darkness of life into a mind reflecting Since Myoho-renge-kyo is the Law inherent within

the essential nature of phenomena and the true our lives, there is another topic I must touch on.

aspect of reality (see WND-1, 4). The virtues of Namely, the relation between the mind of delu-

these causes and effects over time become the sion clouded by innate darkness and the mind

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

of myo illuminated by the essential nature of phe- living true to that vow. This is the way of life of nomena and the true aspect of reality. “taking refuge in the Law” that Shakyamuni

If we follow the deluded minds of ordinary emphasized in his final injunction to his disciples people—minds that tend to be weak and easily before he died.5 swayed—our inner potential can rapidly wither The priests of the various Buddhist schools or, even worse, we may succumb to negative and during Nichiren’s lifetime had forgotten this destructive impulses. This is a problem stemming spirit of Shakyamuni. Following their own arbi-from the subtlety of the mind. Because our minds trary minds or thinking, they lost sight of the are the key to attaining Buddhahood in this Buddha’s teachings, denigrated the Lotus Sutra lifetime, we must overcome our own inner weak- and succumbed to arrogance. By contrast, Nichi-nesses. This is what our Buddhist practice is all ren taught that the true master of the mind is about. The deluded minds of ordinary people are Myoho-renge-kyo—the heart of the Lotus Sutra constantly wavering. We must not make such and the fundamental Law of all Buddhas—and wavering minds our basis or guide. set forth the concrete practice of chanting Nam-

Nichiren Daishonin emphasizes this by citing myoho-renge-kyo for mastering one’s mind. Also, the well-known passage “Become the master of he frequently stressed to his followers the impor-your mind rather than let your mind master you” tant spirit of faith to seek this true master of the (“Letter to the Brothers,” WND-1, 502). This pas- mind—the Mystic Law. sage is from the Six Paramitas Sutra, which states For example, when, on account of his faith, the to the effect: “Our minds may suddenly run out of elder of the Ikegami brothers6 was disowned by control. Therefore, we must tame them like a wild their father, Nichiren encouraged the two brothers, elephant, not allowing our minds to become our saying that this was precisely the time for them, masters, but rather seeking to master our minds.”4 based on faith, to unite and overcome the situa-The Nirvana Sutra contains a similar passage, tion. He offers them this guidance: “A passage in “May I be the master of my mind and not let my the Six Paramitas Sutra says to become the master mind become my master!” (“Letter to Renjo,” of your mind rather than let your mind master WND-2, 5). Nichiren cites this admonition many you. Whatever trouble occurs, regard it as no more times, making it a guideline for his followers. than a dream, and think only of the Lotus Sutra”

Becoming the master of one’s mind means (“Letter to the Brothers,” WND-1, 502). having a sound compass in life and the bright No matter what difficult circumstances we beacon of faith. We must not be mastered by ordi- may face, we can break through them without nary people’s inconstant, weak and ever-changing fail as long as our faith does not waver. Faith minds of delusion. To master our minds, we must is a battle against our own inner weaknesses. guide them in the right direction. In that sense, Nichiren teaches that to win in this battle, we the true master of the mind is the Law and the must base our lives wholeheartedly on the teachings of the Buddha. Shakyamuni vowed to essence of the Lotus Sutra—the Mystic Law of make the Law to which he had become enlight- Nam-myoho-renge-kyo—without being swayed ened the master of his mind, and he took pride in by weak-heartedness.

The Path of Mentor and Disciple my mentor in my heart. This is the spirit of the

Based on the Law oneness of mentor and disciple. Those who

hold fast to their spiritual mentor as their com-

From the story of the Ikegami brothers’ tri- pass and exert themselves as that mentor

umph, we also learn the faith of the oneness teaches are people who live based on the Law. of mentor and disciple. Because the brothers Nichiren Buddhism is a teaching founded on

conducted themselves exactly as Nichiren Dai- the oneness of mentor and disciple. And the

shonin instructed, they could overcome their Lotus Sutra is likewise a scripture of the oneness

ordeal; discern the scheming of Ryokan, chief of mentor and disciple. priest of Gokuraku-ji, behind their father’s At the end of this writing, to convey the

actions; and in the end win the dramatic victory importance of the mentor-disciple relationship

of their father taking faith. in walking the great path of attaining Buddha-

To allow ourselves to be mastered by our hood in this lifetime, Nichiren cites a passage

minds is to lead a self-centered existence. Ulti- from the “Supernatural Powers” chapter of the

mately, we will be pulled this way and that by our Lotus Sutra.7 Next time, I will discuss the pro-constantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism found meaning of this passage, but suffice it to

and sink into the depths of darkness or igno- say here that the path to attaining Buddhahood

rance. Conversely, to become the master of our is found in the practice of Bodhisattvas of

minds is to live based on the Law. the Earth who chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

A teacher or mentor in Buddhism is one who the Law inherent in their lives, for both their

leads and connects people to the Law—teaching own happiness and that of others, and who teach

them that the Law on which they should depend others to do the same. already exists within their own lives. The disciples Above all, the great path to attaining Buddha-

in turn seek the mentor, who embodies and is one hood in this lifetime lies in practicing faith with

with the Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, the spirit of the oneness of mentor and disciple,

they exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. making our minds one with the lofty mind of

In this way, they lead lives in which they become the Buddha and not being swayed by our inner

masters of their minds. darkness or the three poisons—greed, anger and

In other words, the existence of a mentor— foolishness. Faith based on the mentor-disciple

one who embodies and lives in complete accord spirit is the key to opening the treasure within

with the Law, and who teaches people about the our lives that is as vast as the universe. Moreover,

vast inner potential they possess—is indispen- courageously exerting ourselves in chanting

sable for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nam-myoho-renge-kyo and taking action for

I had a mentor who practiced as the Buddha kosen-rufu is the direct path to attaining Buddha-

taught—our second Soka Gakkai president, hood in this lifetime. Josei Toda, who dedicated his life to widely

propagating Nichiren Buddhism in the modern

age—and that has made me who I am today.

President Toda is always with me as my spiritual

mentor. Even now, day after day, and moment

by moment, I am carrying on a dialogue with

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

1. Nagarjuna: A Mahayana scholar of southern India, thought to have constitutes the doctrinal core of T’ien-t’ai’s teaching, the threefold

lived between the years 150 and 250, who is especially known for his contemplation in a single mind constitutes the core of the T’ien-t’ai

systematization of the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. Nonsubstantial- practice. This contemplation involves perceiving the three truths as

ity is the concept that things and phenomena have no fixed or simultaneously and perfectly integrated and interfused in each phe-

independent nature or existence of their own. Nagarjuna integrated nomenon. It is equal to observing a single moment of life and seeing

the practical doctrine of the Middle Way, transcending both asceti- the three thousand realms within it. At the same time, one perceives

cism and hedonism, and the concept of dependent origination into that all phenomena consist of the three thousand realms.

the doctrine of nonsubstantiality. In other words, by viewing all things 4. The Six Paramitas Sutra states: “If you are always the master of your

not as entities with an eternally fixed nature but as always assuming mind rather than letting your mind master you, your mind will not

a temporary and changing aspect through their relation to other run amok. It is just like taming an elephant.”

things (i.e., dependent origination), one can act based on a true per- 5. The Buddha said: “[L]ive as islands unto yourselves, being your own

ception of reality, without either attachment or fixed prejudices (i.e., refuge, with no one else as your refuge, with the Dhamma [i.e., Dhar-

the Middle Way). ma, or Law] as an island, with the Dhamma as your refuge, with no

2. Unification of the three truths: Based on the section in Nagarjuna’s other refuge.” Mahaparinibbana Sutta: The Great Passing—The Bud-

Treatise on the Middle Way that integrates the concepts of nonsubstan- dha’s Last Days, in The Long Discourses of the Buddha: A Translation of

tiality, dependent origination and the Middle Way, the Great Teacher the Digha Nikaya, translated by Maurice Walshe (Boston: Wisdom

T’ien-t’ai established the doctrine of the three truths: the truth of Publications, 1995), p. 245.

nonsubstantiality, the truth of temporary existence and the truth of 6. Ikegami brothers: Leading disciples of Nichiren Daishonin. The elder

the Middle Way. Further, he clarified that these truths, rather than brother, Munenaka, was twice disowned by the father, a follower of

being separate and independent of one another, are three ways of Ryokan. At the same time, the father tempted Munenaga, the younger

viewing any particular thing or entity, and that the three moreover brother, to abandon his faith and take his brother’s place as the next

constitute an integral whole, each possessing all three within itself. head of the family. Despite these adversities, the brothers persevered in

This is called the unification of the three truths. faith. The father rescinded Munenaka’s disinheritance and in the end

3. Threefold contemplation in a single mind: A method of meditation took faith in Nichiren’s teachings.

formulated by T’ien-t’ai to enable people to perceive the unification of 7. The passage states: “After I [Shakyamuni] have passed into extinction,/

the three truths of nonsubstantiality, temporary existence and the [one] should accept and uphold this sutra./ Such a person assuredly and

Middle Way. While the concept of the unification of the three truths without doubt/ will attain the Buddha way” (WND-1, 4; LSOC, 318).

Key Points

The Meaning of Myo—the Middle Way The Meaning of Kyo—the Practice

Nichiren describes this unfathomable nature of the for Oneself and Others

mind as the “mystic entity of the Middle Way that is We can regard this mystic kyo as the spread of the the ultimate reality” (WND-1, 4). The Middle Way Mystic Law from ourselves to others. When “the

does not simply mean the middle course between mind at this moment” is understood to mean the

two extremes; it refers to a more lofty perspective Buddha’s mind and “the mind at other moments”

that is swayed by neither extreme but also is taken to mean the minds of all living beings,

embraces them both. Shakyamuni set forth a then kyo refers to the Buddha’s teachings that sound philosophy and practice transcending the expound aspects of his enlightenment regarding

two then-prevailing extremes of hedonism and the mystic nature of life, or the mind of myo. asceticism, and he called this the Middle Way. In And the king of sutras that directly elucidates

“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” the mind of myo itself is the Lotus Sutra, the Nichiren says that the ultimate truth, which

essence of which is Myoho-renge-kyo. In that

transcends the two extremes of existence and

sense, the development of kosen-rufu, with peo-

nonexistence and yet also manifests both, is the

ple propagating the Mystic Law and chanting

Middle Way, and because this is the pinnacle of

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo unstintingly for their

truth, he calls it the “ultimate reality.” Transcending

own happiness and that of others and teaching

existence and nonexistence can be taken to mean

others to do the same, could be said to corre-

transcending impermanent phenomena that

spond to the mystic kyo. (p. 49)

alternate ceaselessly between existence and nonex-

istence. Further, exhibiting the qualities of both

existence and nonexistence while transcending Mastering One’s Mind— both does not refer to a transcendent or absolute the Path of Mentor and Disciple being divorced from impermanent phenomena, To allow ourselves to be mastered by our minds

but indicates the truly eternal that encompasses and is to lead a self-centered existence. Ultimately,

resides within impermanent phenomena. (p. 48) we will be pulled this way and that by our con-

stantly wavering minds, succumb to egoism and

The Meaning of Renge— sink into the depths of darkness or ignorance.

the Simultaneity of Cause and Effect Conversely, to become the master of our minds

The Mystic Law is not visible to the human eye. is to live based on the Law. A teacher or mentor

Therefore, the Buddha uses a concrete symbol in in Buddhism is one who leads and connects

order to help people understand the Law’s won- people to the Law—teaching them that the Law

drous and mystic nature. This is on which they should depend already exists renge , meaning

“lotus flower.” Why does he employ the lotus within their own lives. The disciples in turn seek

flower? Usually plants flower first and then bear the mentor, who embodies and is one with the

fruit—a relationship that is used to illustrate Law. Looking to the mentor as a model, they linear or sequential causality, with the flowers exert themselves in their Buddhist practice. In representing the cause and the fruit the effect. In this way, they lead lives in which they become

Buddhism, this is referred to as the nonsimultane- masters of their minds. In other words, the

ity of cause and effect. By contrast, the lotus flower existence of a mentor—one who embodies and

puts forth its petals and its receptacle (which con- lives in complete accord with the Law, and who

tains its fruit) simultaneously—in other words, its teaches people about the vast inner potential

fruit is produced at the same time its petals open. they possess—is indispensable for attaining

The lotus thus symbolizes the principle of the Buddhahood in this lifetime. (p. 51) simultaneity of cause and effect. (p. 48)

On Attaining

In This Lifetime

[Chapter 7]

Faith for Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime—

Advance Unerringly Along the Great Path

of the Oneness of Mentor and Disciple

If you chant Myoho-renge-kyo with deep faith in this principle [that the

entity of your life is in fact the entity of the Mystic Law], you are certain to

attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. That is why the sutra states, “After I have

passed into extinction, [one] should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a

person assuredly and without doubt will attain the Buddha way” [The Lotus

Sutra and Its Opening and Closing Sutras, p. 318]. Never doubt in the slightest.

Respectfully.

Maintain your faith and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime. Nam-myoho-

renge-kyo, Nam-myoho-renge-kyo.

—Nichiren (“On Attaining Buddhahood in This Lifetime,” The Writings of Nichiren Daishonin, vol. 1, p. 4)

B irds follow the path of birds, and fish attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime—for all follow the path of fish. Similarly, there humankind. This path is none other than the is a path for us to follow in life for practice of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. achieving happiness as human beings. Ordi-The path of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-nary people cannot easily see this correct kyo is, in a sense, the most natural way for

path, but to the Buddha it is as plain as day. human beings to achieve enlightenment. This Nichiren Daishonin opened the indestruc- is because it is the means for us to reveal the

tible path to happiness—the great path of “mystic truth that is originally inherent” in our

lives (see WND-1, 3). Nichiren emphasizes the We may call it the most natural path, how-

very natural way in which chanting Nam- ever, that does not mean that we do not have to

myoho-renge-kyo allows us to manifest this make personal effort. As with any path, in order

innate mystic truth. to enable many people to follow it, the way has

For instance, he writes (and I have inserted to be opened, obstructions must be removed

the italics in these passages): and a clear pathway must be trodden. Similarly,

the path of chanting entails a struggle to

Shakyamuni’s practices and the virtues maintain faith that Myoho-renge-kyo exists

he consequently attained are all con- within us and to defeat the fundamental dark-

tained within the five characters of ness inherent in our lives. Myoho-renge-kyo. If we believe in When we embrace the five characters of

these five characters, we will naturally Myoho-renge-kyo, we can positively transform

be granted the same benefits as he the cycles of negativity, delusion and suffering

was. (“The Object of Devotion for that our lives have repeatedly undergone as a

Observing the Mind,” WND-1, 365)

result of innate darkness or ignorance. We can

naturally engrave deep within us the causality

The five characters of Myoho-renge-

for attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime.

kyo do not represent the sutra text, nor

Here, faith is the cause, and manifesting

are they its meaning. They are nothing

the life-state of Buddhahood is the effect.

other than the intent of the entire

“To engrave the causality for attaining Bud-

sutra. So, even though the beginners in

dhahood deep in our lives,” therefore, is to

Buddhist practice may not understand

vanquish through faith the inner darkness that

their significance, by practicing these

is the source of evil and misery, and to bring

five characters, they will naturally con-form to the sutra’s intent. (“On the the rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo, the inherent

Four Stages of Faith and the Five mystic truth, to pulse vibrantly in our lives. The

Stages of Practice,” WND-1, 788) life-state of Buddhahood is perfectly in tune

with this rhythm of Myoho-renge-kyo.

If we do not harbor doubts in our Through chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo,

hearts, we will the causality of Buddhahood will come to sup- as a matter of course

attain Buddhahood. (“The Opening of plant the causality of negativity that has existed

the Eyes,” WND-1, 283) in our lives. And when we forge strong faith

that is impervious to any attack of fundamen-

Because Myoho-renge-kyo is the inherent tal darkness or devilish functions, the causality

Law of life to which the Buddha became for attaining Buddhahood takes root in the

enlightened, chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo very core of our beings. represents an unerring practice for us to gain Faith, therefore, is absolutely crucial. That is

enlightenment. Hence, Nichiren says, “You are why Nichiren underscores the importance of

certain to attain Buddhahood in this lifetime” having “deep faith” in sharing the principle that

(WND-1, 4). our lives are entities of the Mystic Law (see

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

WND-1, 4). Indeed, we find Nichiren stressing precisely the faith required for attaining Bud-

the importance of faith throughout “On dhahood in this lifetime. Attaining Buddhahood in this Lifetime.” For In the “Supernatural Powers” chapter,

instance, he writes: “Summon up deep faith” Shakyamuni Buddha transfers the essence of

(WND-1, 3), and “Arouse deep faith” (WND-1, the Lotus Sutra2 to Bodhisattva Superior Prac-4). He teaches that deepening our faith is the tices and the other Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

royal road to achieving enlightenment. He then outlines how these bodhisattvas

The key to our enlightenment as ordinary should exert themselves in propagating the

people ultimately depends on how deeply we sutra after his passing. The above passage

can believe this truth—that, by manifesting the cited by Nichiren at the end of “On Attaining

Mystic Law inherent within our lives, we can Buddhahood in This Lifetime” is the conclud-

definitely attain Buddhahood. ing part of Shakyamuni’s description of

benefits to be gained as a result of those

efforts. Here, “[one] should accept and

“Were They Not Bodhisattvas uphold this sutra” means accepting and

of the Earth, They Could Not upholding the daimoku of the Lotus Sutra,

Chant the Daimoku” Myoho-renge-kyo—the essence of the teach-

ing transmitted by the Buddha to Bodhisattva

The kind of faith needed for attaining Buddha- Superior Practices. hood in this lifetime could thus be described as In “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,”

faith that grows ever deeper. Such faith is truly Nichiren writes, “Were they not Bodhisattvas of

the hallmark of Bodhisattvas of the Earth.1 the Earth, they could not chant the daimoku”

Nichiren Daishonin writes, “These bodhi- (WND-1, 385). What is it that makes the chant-

sattvas are the ones who had thoroughly forged ing of Nam-myoho-renge-kyo so difficult then?

their resolve”—in other words, they possessed Viewed from one perspective, it is because

“thoroughly forged faith” (“General Stone breaking through fundamental darkness and

Tiger,” WND-1, 953). triumphing over devilish functions requires us

At the end of “On Attaining Buddhahood in to chant Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with strong,

This Lifetime,” Nichiren cites the following thoroughly forged faith. passage from the “Supernatural Powers of the

Thus Come One” chapter of the Lotus Sutra:

“After I have passed into extinction, [one] Chanting and Teaching Others should accept and uphold this sutra. Such a To Do the Same person assuredly and without doubt will attain

the Buddha way” (LSOC, 318). He quotes this Further, the true significance of the Bodhi-

as scriptural evidence of gaining enlighten- sattvas of the Earth’s practice of chanting

ment through chanting the daimoku [or title] Nam-myoho-renge-kyo lies in their not only

of the Lotus Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo. We can carrying out this practice themselves but teach-

read this passage to mean that the thoroughly ing others to do the same. In other words, it is

forged faith of the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is a practice for both self and others.

SGI President Ikeda at

ress the November 10, 2006,

P

o Headquarters Leaders

Seiky Meeting in Tokyo, Japan.

In his treatise “The Three Great Secret Also, in “The Object of Devotion for

Laws,” Nichiren Daishonin notes that, in the Observing the Mind,” Nichiren refers to the

Middle Day of the Law, T’ien-t’ai and his practice of chanting that he established as

teacher Nan-Yüeh both chanted the daimoku the “actual practice of the five characters of

of the Lotus Sutra, but they did so merely as a Nam-myoho-renge-kyo” (WND-1, 375). “Actual

private practice and did not teach it to others. practice” here means chanting Nam-myoho-

Nichiren clarifies that, in contrast, he not only renge-kyo in terms of both faith and practice,4

chants it himself but teaches this practice to and establishing the causality of Buddhahood

others.3 as a reality in one’s life.

The daimoku of the Middle Day remained The actual practice of daimoku of the

merely an emblem for perceiving the mystic Bodhisattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of

truth; it was not employed to actually lead peo- the Law means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-

ple to enlightenment. In contrast, the daimoku kyo for the enlightenment of all people—a

of Nichiren Daishonin encompasses both prac- practice aiming for the happiness of both

tice for oneself and others—it has the actual oneself and others. As Nichiren indicates

power, when chanted with thoroughly forged when he says “At first only Nichiren chanted

faith, to break through fundamental darkness Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but then two, three,

and enable all people to reveal their innate and a hundred followed,” the essence of this

Buddhahood. practice is chanting it ourselves and also

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

teaching it to others (“The True Aspect of All and persecutions like those described in the

Phenomena,” WND-1, 385). Lotus Sutra—hatred and jealousy, slander and

The Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted by the abuse, the six difficult and nine easy acts,5 and

Bodhisattvas of the Earth is characterized by the three powerful enemies.6 Nichiren’s true deep, thoroughly forged faith to overcome lifeblood or heritage flows in the mentors and

darkness and devilish functions, and by practice disciples united for kosen-rufu. for both ourselves and others. Its essence, in Now, the sound of the chant of true

short, is faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. Bodhisattvas of the Earth resounds throughout

Shortly after Nichiren proclaimed the estab- the world. Without the kosen-rufu- directed

lishment of his teaching, ready and resolved to faith and obstacle-defeating daimoku practiced

battle all obstacles, he composed this writing, in and spread by the Soka Gakkai, the practice

which he explains the principle of attaining of Nichiren Buddhism for attaining Buddha-

Buddhahood in this lifetime. We must never for- hood in this lifetime would not exist today.

get how Nichiren’s life, a momentous struggle to A fighting faith through which we take on

spread the five characters of Myoho-renge-kyo, and overcome the three obstacles and four dev-

was a succession of great difficulties and perse- ils opens the life-state of Buddhahood. There is

cutions. Without a solid focus on how Nichiren no attaining enlightenment without struggling

propagated the Mystic Law, any discussion of against the three powerful enemies. Those who

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime will just work unceasingly for kosen-rufu are genuine

be empty intellectualizing. Buddhas.

We should carefully ponder Nichiren’s Our second Soka Gakkai president, Josei

words “From the time that I was born until Toda, taught us the substance of the great state

today, I have never known a moment’s ease; I of Buddhahood in concrete terms. Mr. Toda’s

have thought only of propagating the daimoku life was not an easy, uneventful one; it was a

of the Lotus Sutra” (“Persecution by Sword and life of painful vicissitudes. Staff,” WND-1, 965). To seek in Buddhism a life of peace and

quiet, free of trouble, goes against its basic

tenets. The lives of Shakyamuni Buddha and

The Faith of the Soka Gakkai Is Nichiren Daishonin were fierce struggles, any-

Directly Connected to Nichiren thing but tranquil and trouble-free.

It could be said that the genuine spirit of

In the present age, it is the first three presidents Buddhism lies in establishing a towering,

of the Soka Gakkai [Tsunesaburo Makiguchi, indestructible state of life that not even the

Josei Toda and I], sharing the bonds of mentor harshest obstacle can harm. True attainment

and disciple, who have persevered in the struggle of Buddhahood in this lifetime means con-

to propagate Nam-myoho-renge-kyo with faith structing strong faith that will absolutely not

directly connected to Nichiren Daishonin. The be defeated by devilish functions. This is

first three presidents alone, without begrudging what both Shakyamuni and Nichiren taught

their lives, have fought against great hardships through their own examples.

Viewed from the Buddhist perspective, done so. As long as actual proof of the Mystic

Mr. Toda dedicated his life to demonstrating Law continues to blossom brilliantly in each

the state of Buddhahood of one who follows person’s life, the faith of the Soka Gakkai will

the highest human path. As his true, direct dis- shine eternally. Mr. Toda declared that the life of

ciple, I proudly proclaim the great victory of each Soka Gakkai member would be recorded

my mentor’s human revolution. in future sutras as “Soka Gakkai Buddha.”

Of course, each aspect of birth, aging, sick-

ness and death is part of the reality of our lives

Overflowing With Life Force, in this world. Our physical bodies cannot

Fulfilling Our Mission escape the changes found in the cycle of forma-

tion, continuance, decline and disintegration to

But just what is attaining Buddhahood? In which all phenomena in the universe are sub-

discussing this question, President Toda con- ject. Naturally, our bodies deteriorate as we

stantly declared it meant securing eternal age. If practitioners of Nichiren Buddhism

happiness. “Attaining Buddhahood,” he said, were to retain youthful bodies forever, it would

“means achieving a state of being that allows us go against the laws of nature! As we thoroughly

to always be reborn overflowing with powerful polish ourselves through faith, however, the

life force, to fulfill our mission to our heart’s inner essence of our lives will never decay. content, to achieve all our goals and to possess I hope that all our pioneering and senior

good fortune that no one can destroy.” These members who have dedicated themselves to

are words of true philosophy that get at the kosen-rufu with such sincerity over the years

heart of attaining Buddhahood in language will cheerfully, proudly adorn the final chapter

that is simple and straightforward. of their lives with noble victory, confident of

Mr. Toda continued, “And is it not greater this point. Please continue to strive with the

still if we can enjoy tens, hundreds, thousands, spirit of fresh challenge! Looking at Nichiren’s

tens of millions of existences in this way?” I can writings, there is absolutely no doubt that those

still hear his voice ringing in my ears, filled with who forge such a fighting spirit in this existence

indomitable confidence and conviction like the do attain the lofty spiritual state allowing them

mighty roar of a lion king. to make their way freely, joyfully, through the

Those who have dedicated themselves to the journey of eternal life. Mystic Law will, on each successive rebirth, In describing this free, untrammeled state

overflow with vibrant life force, accomplish of life that continues across eternity and

a mission for kosen-rufu that only they can encompasses the entire universe, Mr. Toda

achieve and enjoy immense, indestructible would often say humorously: “We die, but we

good fortune. They can joyfully savor such lives are reborn. For my part, I would like to come

again and again. back as a stunning beauty!” He would then go

Attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, one on to joke that this beauty would be famous

could say, allows us to solidly enter this eternal around the world, with people flocking to buy

path. Countless Soka Gakkai members have her photos and get her autograph. Of course,

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

he said, she would never give her autograph to Mr. Toda, inspired by the majestic form

bad or hateful people. of indomitable Mount Fuji, dauntlessly took

Mr. Toda died at fifty-eight—not an old age the lead for kosen-rufu until his very last

by any means. The two years he had spent in moment. I firmly believe his noble life is an

prison for his beliefs during World War II had example to all of us of attaining Buddhahood

left his health seriously damaged. And the in this lifetime. intense frenzy of activity over the next several

years, which saw him work all out to rebuild

the Soka Gakkai and fulfill his duties as presi- The Lion’s Roar of Mentor dent, also brought bouts of illness. and Disciple United

When a Soka Gakkai leader once asked him

why he was ill, Mr. Toda answered: “My being Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we

sick like this represents a great lessening of cannot attain Buddhahood. Through that sort

karmic retribution.7 Instead of the Soka Gakkai of spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood

being destroyed, I got this illness.” becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of

He also once told someone: “When I die, I our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be think I will return to Nichiren’s side and stay expressed in various other ways, such as: the

there for about a week or ten days. Given the spirit of “true cause,” of always starting from

fact that there are countless planets like the now; the resolve to never regress in faith; the

Earth in the universe, if Nichiren bids me to heart of a lion king; the refusal to be defeated;

go to one of them and work for kosen-rufu faith that grows stronger day by day. there, I will immediately set out as instructed.” Thus Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, chanted with

Such was the boundless state of life he pos- this spirit, is none other than the source of infinite

sessed, ready to go anywhere to carry out advance. No painful difficulty or karma is an

Nichiren’s decree. obstacle for the daimoku of lion kings. Nam-

And Mr. Toda yearned to share this immense myoho-renge-kyo has the power to turn adversity

state of life with as many people as possible. To into a springboard for growth, to change karma

convey just a single portion of the enlighten- into mission, to transform even sorrow into a

ment he had gained, he often taught us that wellspring of creativity. Nichiren Daishonin’s very

the life-state of Buddhahood means absolute life pulses in Nam-myoho-renge-kyo. happiness. “Absolute happiness,” he said, “is to The daimoku of Soka Gakkai members

experience a sense of irrepressible joy in one’s struggling for kosen-rufu is the same as the

life every day, in one’s life at each moment.” daimoku chanted by our first and second

Further, by struggling for kosen-rufu to the presidents, Mr. Makiguchi and Mr. Toda, to

very end, we can savor such an expansive state achieve the great desire of the happiness of all

of being during our final days. Mr. Toda taught humankind. If we forget this fighting daimoku

that this is proof of attaining Buddhahood in of courageous lion kings, our chanting will

this lifetime—proof of having entered the path deviate from that of our mentors. In that case,

of eternal happiness. our chanting will not produce the sound of the

lion’s roar, which is created by mentor and dis- we have endured from the beginningless past

ciple chanting together.8 Not only will it not be and establish the eternal state of Buddhahood.

the daimoku of Nichiren, it will constitute the By challenging ourselves with all our hearts so

practice of an inferior teaching that has no as to have no regrets in this lifetime, we can

relation to the spirit of Shakyamuni. forge a state of life victorious and free of

We may surmise that Nichiren quotes the regret throughout eternity. passage from the “Supernatural Powers” chap-

ter in the final section of this writing to teach I know this solemn spirit of mentor and disciple. the wonder of

supreme happiness

Indeed, viewing it in this light accords with the

and the brilliant victory

spirit to always base ourselves on Nichiren’s

of a great life.

writings, which are the heart of the Soka

Gakkai, an organization directly connected to

I composed this poem at the start of 2006

Nichiren Daishonin.

with the wish that all SGI members will lead

He closes “On Attaining Buddhahood in

tremendously fulfilling lives. May each of you

This Lifetime” with the admonition: “Never

make your way triumphantly along the path of

doubt in the slightest . . . Maintain your faith

attaining Buddhahood in this lifetime, enjoy-

and attain Buddhahood in this lifetime”

ing this “supreme happiness” and the “brilliant

(WND-1, 4). Faith is absolutely essential.

victory of a great life.”

To return to the opening of this writing,

Let us resolutely win in the struggle to

Nichiren talks of freeing ourselves from the

attain Buddhahood in this lifetime, which con-

sufferings of birth and death we have endured

denses eternity into this present moment, and

since time without beginning and attaining

let us joyfully continue our journey of kosen-

without fail unsurpassed enlightenment in this rufu together across eternity. lifetime (see WND-1, 3). The purpose of our

present existence is to cut the chains of suffering

1. Bodhisattvas of the Earth: Disciples of Shakyamuni from the remote 5. Six difficult and nine easy acts: The “Treasure Tower” chapter of the

past whom he calls forth in the “Emerging from the Earth” chapter of Lotus Sutra explains from six perspectives the difficulty of practicing

the Lotus Sutra and entrusts with propagating the Lotus Sutra after his the Lotus Sutra after Shakyamuni’s passing. By contrast, it describes

passing. They are known as Bodhisattvas of the Earth for they appear nine seemingly impossible actions, such as throwing Mount Sumeru

from the earth. Their leader is called Superior Practices. into another world system, as comparatively easy (see LSOC 218–19).

2. Transfer of the essence of the Lotus Sutra: In the “Supernatural 6. Three powerful enemies: The verse section of the “Encouraging

Powers” chapter of the Lotus Sutra, Shakyamuni entrusts the sutra’s Devotion” chapter of the Lotus Sutra describes the people who will

teaching to Bodhisattva Superior Practices and the other Bodhisattvas persecute a person who spreads the Lotus Sutra in the evil age after

of the Earth. This is called the “transfer of the essence” because Shakyamuni’s passing. In his Annotations on “The Words and Phrases

Shakyamuni describes the sutra as containing: 1) “all the doctrines of the Lotus Sutra,” Miao-lo describes these people as belonging to

possessed by the Thus Come One”; 2) “all the freely exercised super-

three categories: arrogant lay people, arrogant monks and nuns, and

natural powers of the Thus Come One”; 3) “the storehouse of all the

arrogant false sages (see LSOC, 233–34).

secret essentials of the Thus Come One”; and 4) “all the most profound

7. Lessening karmic retribution: The principle that one can experience

matters of the Thus Come One,” adding that “all these are proclaimed,

revealed, and clearly expounded in this sutra” (LSOC, 316). the effects of bad karma from the past to a lesser degree because of

Buddhist faith and practice.

3. Nichiren writes, “Now, however, we have entered the Latter Day of the

Law, and the daimoku that I, Nichiren, chant is different from that of 8. The Record of the Orally Transmitted Teachings says: “The lion’s roar

earlier ages. This Nam-myoho-renge-kyo encompasses both practice (shishi ku) is the preaching of the Buddha. The preaching of the Law

for oneself and the teaching of others” (“On the Receiving of the Three means the preaching of the Lotus Sutra, or the preaching of Nam-

Great Secret Laws,” WND-2, 986). myoho-renge-kyo in particular. The first shi of the word shishi, or ‘lion’

4. The daimoku of the essential teaching (Nam-myoho-renge-kyo) has [which means ‘teacher’], is the Wonderful Law that is passed on by the

two aspects: the daimoku of faith and the daimoku of practice. The teacher. The second shi [which means ‘child’] is the Wonderful Law as it

former means to believe in the Gohonzon, the latter to chant Nam- is received by the disciples. The ‘roar’ [of the term ‘lion’s roar’] is the

myoho-renge-kyo and spread it. sound of the teacher and the disciples chanting in unison” (OTT, 111).

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

Key Points

The Path of Chanting Faith Dedicated to Kosen-rufu Is the Natural Way To

The actual practice of daimoku of the Bodhi-

Achieve Enlightenment sattvas of the Earth in the Latter Day of the Law

The path of chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo is, means chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo for the

in a sense, the most natural way for human beings enlightenment of all people—a practice aiming

to achieve enlightenment. This is because it is the for the happiness of both oneself and others. As

means for us to reveal the “mystic truth that is Nichiren indicates when he says “At first only

originally inherent” in our lives (see WND-1, 3). Nichiren chanted Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, but

Nichiren emphasizes the very natural way in then two, three, and a hundred followed,” the

which chanting Nam-myoho-renge-kyo allows us essence of this practice is chanting it ourselves

to manifest this innate mystic truth. (pp. 54–55) and also teaching it to others (“The True Aspect

of All Phenomena,” WND-1, 385).

The Nam-myoho-renge-kyo chanted by the

Strong Faith Is Required Bodhisattvas of the Earth is characterized by

To Attain Buddhahood deep, thoroughly forged faith to overcome dark-

in This Lifetime ness and devilish functions, and by practice for

both ourselves and others. Its essence, in short, is

The kind of faith needed for attaining Buddha-

faith dedicated to kosen-rufu. (pp. 57–58)

hood in this lifetime could thus be described

as faith that grows ever deeper. Such faith is

Opening the Life-State of Buddhahood

truly the hallmark of Bodhisattvas of the Earth.

Nichiren Daishonin writes, “These bodhisattvas A fighting faith through which we take on and

are the ones who had thoroughly forged their overcome the three obstacles and four devils opens

resolve”—in other words, they possessed “thor- the life-state of Buddhahood. There is no attaining

oughly forged faith” (“General Stone Tiger,” enlightenment without struggling against the three

WND-1, 953). powerful enemies. Those who work unceasingly

At the end of “On Attaining Buddhahood in for kosen-rufu are genuine Buddhas. (p. 58)

This Lifetime,” Nichiren cites the following pas-

sage from the “Supernatural Powers of the Thus

Attaining Buddhahood

Come One” chapter of the Lotus Sutra: “After I

With a Challenging Spirit

have passed into extinction, [one] should accept

and uphold this sutra. Such a person assuredly Without a challenging or fighting spirit, we can-

and without doubt will attain the Buddha not attain Buddhahood. Through that sort of way” (LSOC, 318). He quotes this as scriptural spirit, the causality of attaining Buddhahood

evidence of gaining enlightenment through becomes established as a solid, shining pillar of

chanting the daimoku [or title] of the Lotus our lives. The term fighting spirit can also be Sutra, Myoho-renge-kyo. We can read this pas- expressed in various other ways, such as: the

sage to mean that the thoroughly forged faith of spirit of “true cause,” of always starting from now;

the Bodhisattvas of the Earth is precisely the the resolve to never regress in faith; the heart of a

faith required for attaining Buddhahood in this lion king; the refusal to be defeated; faith that

lifetime. (p. 56) grows stronger day by day. (p. 60)

Index

A E action, Buddhist wisdom into, 12; “Earthly Desires are Enlightenment,” 42

taking, 43, 51 “Emerging from the Earth” chapter

attitude, 29, 32, 34, 41 (Lotus Sutra), 43

“The Entity of the Mystic Law,” 14

“Expedient Means” chapter (Lotus

B Sutra), 40 bodhisattvas, 39

Bodhisattvas of the Earth, 56; practice of

the, 57–58 F

Buddha(s), 13, 31, 50, 58; and ordinary faith, 3, 5–7, 9, 20–22, 24–25, 30–34,

people, 4, 22, 24, 38–39; 39–43, 49–51, 55–61; dedicated to

Bodhisattva Superior Practices kosen-rufu, 58

and, 56 “The Farther the Source, the Longer the

Buddhahood, 2–9, 13–14, 17–18, 21–24, Stream,” 42

29–34, 39, 41–43, 47, 49–51, fighting spirit, to battle our inner funda-

54–61; scriptural evidence of mental darkness, 40, 59, 60

attaining, 56. See also Myoho- fundamental darkness, 8, 18, 20–21, 24,

renge-kyo; Nam-myoho- 29–32, 34, 39–42, 47, 49, 51,

renge-kyo 55–58

Buddhism, 13, 17, 22, 47

G

C “General Stone Tiger,” 56 cause and effect, 21, 48–49, 55 Gohonzon, 31

challenging spirit, 41 grave offenses, 30 compassion, 43

courage, 34, 41, 43

H

happiness, 2, 13, 21–22, 43

D “Happiness in This World,” 21, 41 daimoku heart, importance of, 5, 6, 21, 29, 34, 38, [Nam-myoho-renge-kyo],

56–57, 60–61 39, 47, 49. See also mind

“Devadatta” chapter (Lotus Sutra), 4 ho, 48 difficulties, 34, 55 “How Those Initially Aspiring to the Way

“The Difficulty of Sustaining Faith,” 41 Can Attain Buddhahood through

the Lotus Sutra,” 23

On Attaining in This Lifetime Buddhahood

human existence, 11 Myoho-renge-kyo, 14–15, 17, 21, 23, 47, 49,

humankind, 18; changing destiny of, 8–9, 55. See also Buddhahood; mystic

17, 49. See also kosen-rufu truth; Nam-myoho-renge-kyo

Mystic Law, 6, 22–24, 29, 33–34, 39, 50,

I Nam-myoho-renge-kyo 56, 59. See also Myoho-renge-kyo;

inner change, 5–6, 8, 29, 38–39, 49 mystic truth, 6, 13–17, 21, 41, 47, 49, 55,

57; manifesting the, 4. See also

K Myoho-renge-kyo kosen-rufu, 33, 42, 51, 58–61. See also

humankind N

kyo, 49

Nagarjuna, 48

Nam-myoho-renge-kyo, 3, 11–12, 15–18,

L 20–24, 26, 29–34, 38–43, 47, “Letter to Niike,” 24 49–51, 54–55, 57; and fighting

“Letter to Renjo,” 50 spirit, 60; mirror analogy, 6,

“Letter to the Brothers,” 50 37–40, 42, 47. See also Buddha-

“Life Span” chapter (Lotus Sutra), 14 hood; Myoho-renge-kyo

living true to oneself (Josei Toda), 25 Nan-Yüeh, 57 Lotus Sutra, 13–14, 16–17, 22, 33, 38, negative functions, 55; defeating, 5

49–51, 58 Nichikan, 14, 18, 31, 40

The Lotus Sutra and Its Opening and Nichiren Buddhism, 2–4, 7–9, 12, 14,

Closing Sutras 16–18, 20, 26, 30–31, 33–34, , 38

40–41, 43, 50–51, 57–59

Nichiren Daishonin, 2–4, 6–9, 11–15,

M 17–18, 20–21, 23, 25–26, 28–30,

Mahayana Buddhism, 13, 25 32, 34, 37–42, 46–49, 54–58,

Makiguchi, Tsunesaburo, 7, 33, 58, 60; on 60–61; admonition of, 24, 31, 50;

Nichiren Buddhism, 43 and human beings, 5

Manjushri, 39 Nirvana Sutra, 50

“The Meaning of the Sacred Teachings of non-Buddhist thinking, 29–31

the Buddha’s Lifetime,” 26

mentor-disciple relationship, 33, 43, 51,

58–61 O

Middle Day, practice of, 57 “The Object of Devotion for Observing

Middle Way, 48 the Mind,” 21, 55, 57

mind(s), 5–8, 14, 16–17, 21, 29–30, 34, “On Persecutions Befalling the Sage,” 42

38–39, 43, 47–51. See also heart “On the Four Stages of Faith and the

myo, 47–49 Five Stages of Practice,” 55

ordinary people, 4, 21–22, 24, 38, 48, 50, “Supernatural Powers” chapter (Lotus

54, 56 Sutra), 51, 56, 61

P T “Persecution by Sword and Staff,” 58 “The Teaching, Practice and Proof,” 34

perseverance, 41–43 “The Three Great Secret Laws,” 57 polishing our lives, by chanting Nam- three thousand realms in a single

myoho-renge-kyo, 39–42 moment of life, 14, 15, 18, 24

pre-Lotus Sutra teachings, 4, 22–23, 48 “The True Aspect of All Phenomena,” 7,

present existence, 61 56, 58 provisional teachings. See pre-Lotus T’ien-t’ai, 14, 16–17, 48, 57; Buddhism

Sutra teachings of, 30

Pushkin, Aleksandr, 18 Toda, Josei, 24, 33, 42, 51, 58; on Bud-

dhahood, 59–60; on illness, 60;

and the Mystic Law, 25; “Soka

R Gakkai Buddha,” 59; on the

The Record of Orally Transmitted Teach- young women’s division, 34; on

ings, 29–30, 42–43 youth, 43

religion(s), 22, 25; purpose of, 11 Toki Jonin, 3

renge, 48–49 transmigration, 12–13

Ryokan, 51 twenty-first century, transforming, 2

S U seeking the Law of Nam-myoho-renge- unity, 33

kyo, 6, 8, 25, 28–32

“The Selection of the Time,” 22

SGI, members of the, 3, 9, 33, 61 V Shakyamuni, 11, 13–14, 30, 48, 50, 56, victory, 43

58, 61 Vimalakirti, 39

Six Paramitas Sutra, 50 Vimalakirti Sutra, 38–39 Six-Volume Writings (Nichikan), 31

slander, 32–33

Soka Gakkai, 31, 33, 59; members, 42, W

59–60; and Nichiren’s writings, 61 wisdom, Buddhist, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17,

“The Strategy of the Lotus Sutra,” 21, 47 30, 32, 38, 43, 48 substituting faith for wisdom, 30–31, 35

sufferings of birth and death, 2, 3, 4, 11,

12, 13, 28, 37, 38, 39, 61

Notes

Notes

Notes